Internal Medicine (Nutrition)
Lecture 1

Dr. Ammar Waham Ashor

Introduction to Clinical Nutrition
Human nutrition: describes the processes whereby the human body obtain and
use necessary substances from foods (nutrients) to maintain structural and
functional integrity.
Clinical nutrition focuses on the nutritional management of individual patients
or groups of patients with established disease. Public health nutrition: focuses
on health promotion and disease prevention in the general population.
Nutrients: chemical substances obtained from food and used in the body to
provide energy, structural materials, and regulating agents to support growth,
maintenance, and repair of the body’s tissues. Nutrients may also reduce the risks
of some diseases.
Essential nutrients: nutrients a person must obtain from food because the body
cannot make them for itself in sufficient quantity to meet physiological needs;
also called indispensable nutrients.
Classification of nutrients
The major nutrients have traditionally been classified according to the amounts
in which they are required, their chemical nature and their functions in the body.
A principal distinction is between macronutrients and micronutrients.
 Macronutrients are required in large amounts by the body, usually measured
in tens of grams.
 Micronutrients are substances required in very small amounts by the body,
generally measured in milligrams or micrograms.
Macronutrients
 The macronutrients found in the diet are carbohydrates, fats and proteins.
1

Internal Medicine (Nutrition)
Lecture 1

Dr. Ammar Waham Ashor

 Carbohydrates and fats are the major providers of energy, although protein
can also provide energy.
 They all have a structural role, the most important in this respect being
proteins.
 All contain carbon, hydrogen and oxygen; in addition, proteins contain
nitrogen and some contain sulphur.
1. Carbohydrates
These are saccharides, combined in various degrees of complexity to form the
simple sugars, and larger units such as oligosaccharides and polysaccharides.
Their main function is to act as a source of energy, in the form of glucose. Some
resist

digestion

(termed

nonglycemic),

and

comprise

the

non-starch

polysaccharides (NSP), which are part of ‘dietary fibre’ and have a role in bowel
function.
2. Fats
Fats comprise a diverse group of lipid-soluble substances, the majority being
triglycerides or triacylglycerols (TAGs). Derived products such as phospholipids
and sterols (most notably cholesterol) are included in this group.
TAGs are broken down to yield energy, and form the major energy reserve in the
body, in adipose tissue. Specific fatty acids found in TAGs are important in cell
membrane structure and function, and must be supplied in the diet. These are
termed essential fatty acids.
3. Proteins
Proteins consist of chains of individual amino acids, combined to form a large
variety of proteins. On digestion, individual amino acids are used for the synthesis
of other amino acids and proteins required by the body, involving considerable
recycling of the components.
2

Internal Medicine (Nutrition)
Lecture 1

Dr. Ammar Waham Ashor

There are eight ‘essential amino acids’ (more in children), which must be supplied
by the diet. In addition, some may become ‘conditionally’ essential in particular
situations of physiological stress. Only when there is no further need for amino
acids are they broken down and used as a source of energy, and the nitrogen part
excreted as urea.
Micronutrients
1. Minerals
These are inorganic substances needed in small amounts, generally as part of the
structure of other molecules (e.g. iron as part of haemoglobin), or as essential
cofactors for the activity of enzymes (e.g. selenium in glutathione peroxidase).
Uptake of some minerals from the diet must be carefully regulated as there is
limited excretion, and potential toxicity may result if large amounts accumulate
in storage organs. In addition, some minerals compete with each other for
absorption, so excessive intakes of one may hinder uptake of another (e.g. zinc
and iron, or iron and calcium).
2. Vitamins
These share the common feature of being organic substances, required by the
body in small amounts for its normal functioning. The vitamins are sub-classified,
into water-soluble (vitamin C and B vitamins) and fat-soluble (vitamins A, D, E
and K) groups. It is now recognised that vitamin D is synthesised in the skin by
the action of ultraviolet light on a precursor, and could strictly be termed a
hormone rather than a vitamin. Further, niacin can be made in the body from the
amino acid tryptophan, so a separate supply may not be needed if protein intakes
are adequate. However, in both of these cases, there are situations where synthesis
is insufficient, and so a dietary need remains.

3

Internal Medicine (Nutrition)
Lecture 1

Dr. Ammar Waham Ashor

Water
Water provides the basic medium in which all the body’s reactions occur. An
inadequate level of fluid intake will quickly compromise the metabolic functions
of the body and disturb the homeostatic mechanisms that operate.
Nutritional requirements
A certain amount of every nutrient is used by the body every day. This amount
must therefore be replaced, either from the diet or from body stores. A
requirement is defined as the amount of a specific nutrient required by an
individual to prevent clinical signs of deficiency.
Using the results of thousands of research studies, nutrition experts have
produced a set of standards that define the amounts of energy, nutrients, other
dietary components, and physical activity that best support health. These
recommendations are called Dietary Reference Intakes (DRI). These DRI apply
to healthy people and may not be appropriate for people with diseases. Patients
with certain diseases may require increase or decrease in nutrient needs.
Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) A set of four types of nutrient intake
reference standards used to assess and plan dietary intake; these include the
Estimated Average Requirements (EARs), Recommended Dietary Allowances
(RDAs), Adequate Intake levels (AIs), and the Tolerable Upper Intake Levels
(ULs).
Estimated Average Requirement (EAR) The amount of a nutrient that meets
the physiological requirements of half the healthy population in a specified life
stage and gender group.

4

Internal Medicine (Nutrition)
Lecture 1

Dr. Ammar Waham Ashor

Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) The average intake of a nutrient
thought to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%) healthy people in a
specified life stage and gender group.
Adequate Intake (AI) level Nutrient intake of healthy populations that appears
to support adequate nutritional status; established when RDAs cannot be
determined.
Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) The highest level of chronic intake of a
nutrient thought to be not detrimental to health.

Energy from foods
The amount of energy a food provides depends on how much carbohydrate, fat,
and protein it contains. When completely broken down in the body, a gram of
carbohydrate yields about 4 kcalories of energy; a gram of protein also yields 4
kcalories; and a gram of fat yields 9 kcalories. Because fat provides more energy
per gram, it has a greater energy density than either carbohydrate or protein.
Calories: units by which energy is measured. Food energy is measured in
kilocalories (1000 calories equal 1 kilocalorie), abbreviated kcalories or kcal. One
kcalorie is the amount of heat necessary to raise the temperature of 1 kilogram of
water by 1°C. The scientific use of the term kcalorie is the same as the popular
5

Internal Medicine (Nutrition)
Lecture 1

Dr. Ammar Waham Ashor

use of the term calorie. However, the international unit for measuring food energy
is the joule, a measure of work energy. One joule is the energy used when a mass
of 1 kilogram is moved through 1 meter by using a force of 1 newton. To convert
kcalories to kilojoules, multiply by 4.2; to convert kilojoules to kcalories,
multiply by 0.24.
To calculate the energy available from a food, multiply the number of grams of
carbohydrate, protein, and fat by 4, 4, and 9, respectively. Then add the results
together. For example, 1 slice of bread with 1 tablespoon of peanut butter on it
contains 16 grams carbohydrate, 7 grams protein, and 9 grams fat:
 16 g carbohydrate × 4 kcal/g = 64 kcal
 7 g protein × 4 kcal/g = 28 kcal
 9 g fat × 9 kcal/g = 81 kcal
 Total = 173 kcal
Energy in the body: The body uses the energy-yielding nutrients to fuel all its
activities. When the body uses carbohydrate, fat, or protein for energy, the bonds
between the nutrient’s atoms break. As the bonds break, they release energy.
Some of this energy is released as heat, but some is used to send electrical
impulses through the brain and nerves, to synthesize body compounds, and to
move muscles.
If the body does not use these nutrients to fuel its current activities, it converts
them into storage compounds (such as body fat) to be used between meals and
overnight when fresh energy supplies run low. If more energy is consumed than
expended, the result is an increase in energy stores and weight gain. Similarly, if
less energy is consumed than expended, the result is a decrease in energy stores
and weight loss.

6

Internal Medicine (Nutrition)
Lecture 1

Dr. Ammar Waham Ashor

Energy requirements
Estimated Energy Requirement (EER): the average dietary energy intake that
maintains energy balance and good health in a person of a given age, gender,
weight, height, and level of physical activity. There are two approaches to
assessing energy requirements for subjects who are weight-stable and close to
energy balance:
1. Assessment of energy intake: Energy intake can be estimated from dietary
surveys and, in the past, this has been used to decide daily energy
requirements. However, measurement of energy expenditure gives a more
accurate assessment of requirements.
2. Assessment of total energy expenditure: Daily energy expenditure is the
sum of:
a. The basal metabolic rate (BMR): is the minimum amount of energy
expended that is compatible with life. An individual’s BMR reflects the
amount of energy used during 24 hours while physically and mentally at rest
in a thermoneutral environment that prevents the activation of heat-generating
processes, such as shivering.
Factors affecting BMR include: Age (higher in younger), gender (higher in
males), body composition (higher in leaner [muscular] individuals), body size
(higher in larger people), food intake (higher with caffeine or nicotine intake).
b. The diet-induced thermogenesis: is the increase in energy expenditure
associated with the consumption, digestion, and absorption of food. This
represent about 10% of total energy expenditure.
c. Physical activity: this encompasses all types of activity, including sports and
leisure, work-related activities, general activities of daily living, and fidgeting.
The metabolic rate of physical activity is determined by the amount or
duration of activity (i.e., time), the type of physical activity (e.g., walking,
7

Internal Medicine (Nutrition)
Lecture 1

Dr. Ammar Waham Ashor

running, typing), and the intensity at which the particular activity is
performed. The contribution of physical activity is the most variable
component of total energy expenditure, which may be as low as 100 kcal/day
in sedentary people or as high as 3000 kcal/day in athletes.
Non-exercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT): represents the energy expended
during the workday and during leisure-type activities (e.g., shopping, fidgeting,
even gum chewing), which may account for vast differences in energy costs
among people.
The ratio of total energy expenditure to BMR provide a rough index of physical
activity referred to as physical activity level (PAL). If the person is sedentary, the
PAL coefficient is 1.0. If the person is somewhat active, the PAL coefficient is
1.12. If the person is active, the PAL coefficient is 1.27. If the person is very
active, the PAL coefficient is 1.45.
Regulation of food intake and energy expenditure
Hunger can be defined as a demand for energy (e.g. after starvation), while
appetite refers to a demand for a particular food. Satiety refers to the inhibition
of further intake of food or meal after eating has ended. There are both short- and
long-term mechanisms for regulating food intake and energy expenditure so as to
maintain energy balance.
Short-term signals regulating food intake: The distention of the stomach wall
in response to the presence of food, called gastric stretching, provides a powerful
satiety signal. The GI tract has specialized receptors (mechano-receptors) that are
responsive to this type of stretching.
The concentration of certain nutrients in the blood can also influence hunger and
satiety. For example, the brain is very sensitive to changes in blood glucose and
amino acids levels. When blood glucose and amino acids increase following a
8

Internal Medicine (Nutrition)
Lecture 1

Dr. Ammar Waham Ashor

meal, the brain responds by releasing neurotransmitters that stimulate satiety,
providing a signal to stop eating.
The presence of food in the stomach and small intestine can trigger the release of
several GI hormones, the majority of which promote satiety (table below).

Long-term signals regulating food intake and energy homeostasis: Insulin
and leptin are the two most important long-term regulators of food intake and
energy balance. Both insulin and leptin act in the CNS to inhibit food intake and
to increase energy expenditure, most likely by activating the sympathetic nervous
system (SNS).
Insulin is secreted from beta cells in the endocrine pancreas in response to
circulating nutrients (glucose and amino acids) and to the incretin hormones,
glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) and glucagon-like peptide-1
(GLP-1), which are released during meal ingestion and absorption.
Leptin is mainly secreted by the adipose tissue and its main function is to regulate
long-term food intake and energy expenditure in response to the state of fat
reserves. The gastric hormone ghrelin increases food intake and decreases fat

9

Internal Medicine (Nutrition)
Lecture 1

Dr. Ammar Waham Ashor

oxidation in rodents and may have an anabolic role in long-term food intake
regulation
Appetite Effects on Energy Intake
Two important responses that help maintain a healthy body weight are eating
when you hungry and stopping when you are full. However, sometimes we eat
for reasons other than hunger, and at times we eat past satiety. The stimuli that
override hunger and satiety tend to be more psychological than physiological.
Whereas appetite is the psychological longing or desire for food, a food aversion
is a strong psychological dislike of a particular food or foods. Sometimes, even
the thought or smell of certain foods can trigger an adverse physical response.
Our appetite can be an important determinant of what and when we eat. When the
desire for a specific food is especially compelling, it is often referred to as a food
craving.
Estimation of energy requirement

PAL

10

