A TEXT BOOK OF
FOOD AND NUTRITION
Dr. D. V. Ahirrao
M. Sc. Ph. D.
Associate Professor, PG Department of Zoology,
S. S. V. P. S’s.
L. K. Dr. P. R. Ghogrey Science College, Dhule.

Dr. N. H. Desale
M. Sc. Ph. D.
Department of Zoology,
KVPS’s Arts, Commerce and Science College, Parola, Dist. Jalgaon

Page |1

A TEXT BOOK OF
FOOD AND NUTRITION

© Dr. D. V. Ahirrao, Dr. N. H. Desale

 Publisher :
Harshwardhan Publication Pvt. Ltd.
Limbaganesh, Dist. Beed (Maharashtra)
Pin-431126, vidyawarta@gmail.com

 Printed by :
Harshwardhan Publication Pvt. Ltd.
Limbaganesh, Dist. Beed, Pin-431126

Page design & Cover :
Shaikh Jahurodden

Edition: August 2019

ISBN 978-93-89003-46-8

 Price : 299/ -

Page |2

PREFACE
Food and Nutrition book is much awaited by the authors. This book is written for the
undergraduate students. The present book is being humbly offered to satisfy the demand for
better, exhaustive and authoritative coverage on various aspects of food and nutrition.
We have written this text book, Food and Nutrition with full academic interest and by
adding the essence of devotion, dedication and determination and urge to provide updated
information to the students. The aim of this text book is to provide full details and the basic
knowledge of the subject in the most effective and positive manner. The knowledge level of the
students in the subject is always given top priority and hence the complicated concepts are
simplified. The whole text book is readable and the same time made very informative. Exhaustive
exercise is given for each topic to prepare the students for examination.
The very special features of this book are, adequate and accurate illustrations, the whole
matter is fertilised with good, simple information. Each and every topic in fully illustrated,
diagrams are necessary to understand the matter correctly.
We are extremely grateful to our Chairman, Principal of the respective college and
authorities of BOS in Zoology, Kavayitri Bahinabai Chaudhari North Maharashtra University
Jalgaon.
All comments and suggestion for the improvement of book will be thankfully accepted.

-

Authors

Page |3

FOOD AND NUTRITION
Unit - 1
1.1 Introduction
1.2 Scope and importance
1.3 Concepts and significance
1.4 Classification of food and proximate components of food.
1.5 Five food group plan (ICMR)
1.6 Balanced diet
1.7 Units of energy
1.8 Direct and indirect calorimetry
1.9 BMR and factors affecting BMR
1.10 Respiratory quotient
1.11 Food nutrition and health
Unit - 2
2.1 Carbohydrates:
2.1.1 Composition and Sources.
2.1.2 Nutritional value/ energy value/ fuel value, and required daily allowances.
2.1.3 Deficiency and excess intake disease, and biological importance.
2.2 Proteins:
2.2.1 Composition and Sources.
2.2.2 Nutritional value/ energy value / fuel value, required daily allowances.
2.2.3 Deficiency and excess intake disease, and biological importance.
Unit - 3
3.1 Fats and oils:
3.1.1 Composition and Sources.
3.1.2 Nutritional value/ energy value / fuel value, required daily allowances.
3.1.3 Deficiency and excess intake disease, Functions.
3.1.4 Anti-nutritional factors, biological effect of antioxidants.
3.2 Vitamins:
3.2.1 Composition and Sources.
3.2.2 Nutritional value/ energy value / fuel Value, required daily allowances.
3.2.3 Deficiency and excess intake disease, Functions.
3.2.4 Vitamins as accessory factor of food.

Page |4
3.3 Minerals:
3.3.1 Composition and Sources.
3.3.2 Nutritional value/ energy value / fuel Value, required daily allowances.
3.3.3 Deficiency and excess intake disease, Functions.
Unit - 4
4.1 Meal planning of various age groups
4.2 Methods of cooking
4.3 Dry, moist and combination
4.4 Food adulterations and its effects
4.5 Alcoholism
4.6 Therapeutic diet and its types
4.7 Diet modification in diseases
4.8 Representative diet in various diseases: Diabetic mellitus, cardiovascular diseases, Obesity,
Arteriosclerosis, Kidney diseases, Peptic ulcer, Anemia, Gastrointestinal diseases.

Page |5

Unit - 1
Introduction:
Food is the prime necessity of life. The food we eat is digested and assimilated in the body and
used for its maintenance and growth. Food also provides energy for doing work. Man has
cultivated variety of grains, fruits, vegetables, nuts and oilseeds and in rearing birds and animals
for use as food.
The selection of foods best suited for promoting good health has been found out by trial and error
by continues use. Use of milk of different mammals as food for infants has been practiced from
very early times. A considerable amount of information is now available on the nutritive value of
food and nutritional requirements.
Scope and Importance:
Nutrition and dietetics is a vital, growing field and the opportunities and possibilities in this field
are endless. Nutritionalists and dietitians (The person who is an expert in nutrition or dietetics)
could found employment in hospitals, health and recreation clubs, canteens, nursing care
facilities; teach the science of nutrition and dietetics in colleges and universities, catering
departments of government etc.
The main field in which dieticians or nutritionists can work in a food service field, research and
development and social welfare. Food service include food catering services, restaurants etc
where professionalists can do menu planning, monitoring the food preparation etc.
Institutional catering is another field nutrition and dietetics professionals are needed to plan,
supervise and prepare nutritious and well balanced meals for schools, colleges, factories or office
canteens or cafeterias etc.
In health care field, people suffering from certain diseases, obesity etc need to take extra care of
their eating habits and the kind of food they eat. Depending on the nutrition needs of patients,
dieticians prepare their diet charts and monitor the results of dietary therapy and maintain records.
Research and development involves conducting research on various food items to ensure their
quality as well as studying the efforts of various types of diet on the body chemistry in labs. The
research dieticians or nutritionalists do research on nutritive value of food which helps to
understand the various components of food we eat and the right type of food which provide a
balanced mix of essentials like vitamins, minerals etc needed for human body.
Organizations involved in food product manufacturer use services of nutritionists and dieticians to
plan and research new products as well as check the nutritional quality of their products. Research
carrier occurs mainly in universities, specialists in institutions, food product manufacturing
companies and hospitals.

Page |6
Concepts and Significance:
Today’s scientific understanding of human nutrition is one of the most important contributions of
biochemistry. It has saved countless human lives or improved their quality. Until relatively recent
time’s pellagra, beriberi and rickets were endemic in many parts of the world. Today these
diseases need no longer occur since we have the knowledge of nutrition, more than one-eighth of
the worlds population us undernourished and paradoxically, many people in the most affluent
(rich) countries are malnourished, not through deficiency if food but through consumption and
other imbalances.
Food material that is metabolized by the body facilitating the building of tissue and liberation of
energy. The science of nutrition tries to define the qualitative and quantitative requirements of the
diet necessary to maintain the good health. Digestion and absorption of the food constitute the
essential link between nutrition and metabolism. Overt (openly) nutritional deficiency is rare in
more affluent populations, although the degree of nutritional deficiency may be present among the
poor or the elderly and among groups with specialized nutritional requirements e.g. growing
children, pregnant or lactating woman, ill patients, alcoholics or individuals on restricted diets
from choice or necessity.
In more deprived populations, overt deficiencies are more widespread e.g. deficiency of protein
(Kwashiorkor), vitamins (vitamin A in Xerophthalmia), minerals (iron in Anaemia), and energy
(Starvation).
Although obesity has always been associated with dietary excess, the concept of excess intake of
particular nutrients and their association with occurance of certain diseases in developed societies
is gaining recognition e.g. Atherosclerosis (a condition caused by intramural deposition of LDL
(Low density lipids), secondary to exposure of smooth muscle of lipid, resulting in platelet
induced smooth muscle proliferation, formation of fibrotic plaques and calcification) and
coronary heart disease, diabetes and strokes and cirrhosis of liver metabolism of nutrients or
defects in digestive enzymes also leads to pathogenic conditions e.g. malabsorption of vitamin B12
and foliate causes Anemia, defects is calcium, magnesium and vitamin D absorption lead to
Tetany and osteoporosis, lactase deficiency give rise to milk intolerance and defects in absorption
of neutral amino acids are involved in Hartnup disease.
Functions of Food:
1) Physiological Function:
i) It provides energy to do work and to maintain body heat.
ii) It provides material for growth of the body.
iii) It provides material for the repair of damaged cells and tissues of our body.
iv) It makes materials necessary for reproduction.

Page |7
v) It regulates body processes to maintain life.
2) Social Functions:
Food has always been the central part of our community, social, cultural and religious life. It has
been an expression of love, friendship and happiness at religious, social and family get-togethers.
Food carries a lot of social significance. Warmth and friendship are expressed through sharing
one’s food or inviting people to dinner. To serve food at many social functions (marriage,
birthday etc) is quite prevalent in our country. Even high dignitaries arrange social get together on
certain religious occasions such as Id etc. Preparing special foods or one’s favourite food is a way
of showing respect or affection.
3) Psychological Functions:
In addition to satisfying physical and social needs, foods also satisfy certain emotional needs of
human beings. These include a sense of security, love and acceptance. For example, preparation
of delicious foods for family members is a token of love and affection.
We all have emotional needs such as need for love attention and security. Food can play important
role in fulfilling these needs. A mother can express her love for her child by preparing the child’s
favourite meal. Food can be given as a reward for good behavior or deprived as a punishment for
bad behavior.
People feel comfortable and secure when they are served food they have been used to consuming.
Many people eat to relive anxiety and frustration, while some may eat less or refuse food when
they are depressed and lonely.
Certain foods may be associated with sickness e.g. Sago kheer and Khichdi, while others such as
Pedha are associated with good tidings. Food is therefore strongly associated with one’s emotion
and feelings.
Classification of Food and Proximate Components of Food:
Food vary widely in their contents of various nutrients, they have been classified into three groups
on the nutritional basis - Energy yielding, Body building and Protective food.
1) Energy yielding foods:
Foods rich in carbohydrates and fats are called energy yielding foods. They provide energy to
sustain the involuntary processes essential for continuance of life to carry out various
professional, household and recreational activities and to convert food ingested into usable
nutrients in the body. The energy needed is supplied by the oxidation of foods consumed. Cereals,
roots and tubers, dried fruits, oils, butter and ghee are all good sources of energy.

2) Body building foods:

Page |8
Foods rich in protein are called body building foods. Milk, meat, eggs and fish are rich in proteins
of high quality. Pulses and nuts are good sources of protein but the protein is not of high quality.
These foods help to maintain life and promote growth. They also supply energy.
3) Protective and Regulatory foods:
Foods rich in protein, minerals and vitamins are known as protective and regulatory foods. They
are essential for health and regulate activities such as maintenance of body temperature, muscle
contraction, control of water balance, clotting of blood, removal of waste products from the body
and maintaining heartbeat. Milk, egg, liver, fruits and vegetables are protective foods.
Protective foods are further classified into two groupsi) Food rich in vitamins, minerals and proteins of high biological value. Exa - Milk, eggs and
liver.
ii) Food rich in certain vitamins and mineral only. Exa – Green leafy vegetables and fruits.
Proximate Components of Food:
Food is substance of animal and plant origin/source that yield heat and energy when ingested and
absorbed by the body. Food nutrients build and renew tissues and regulate the body process.
Carbohydrates, proteins and fats are called as Proximate principles. They are oxidized in the body
to provide the energy required for various activities of life. They also formulate the structural
components of the body. Together with water, this is also a necessary dietary element, proximate
principles from the main bulk of foods.
Amino acids, vitamins and mineral salts on the other hand play vital role in the regulation of
several essential metabolic processes in the body. Some mineral salts are important components
of body structures like bones and blood.
Carbohydrates:
Carbohydrates are the main source of energy doing work. The carbohydrates commonly occurring
in foods are starch, cane sugar, glucose, fructose and milk sugar (lactose). About 50-70% of
energy value (calorie value) in the average diet is provided by carbohydrates. They are the
cheapest source of energy. Glucose derived from the digestion of carbohydrates is used as the
main source of the energy in the body. Hence, the diets should contain adequate amount of
carbohydrate to meet a greater part of energy needs.
Proteins:
Proteins are required for growth in children and maintenance of body weight in adults. Proteins
are providing energy to a small amount (extent). Proteins constitute about 20% of the body
weight. Body proteins are derived from the dietary proteins.
Proteins are made up of amino acids. The amino acid content of proteins from one protein to
another is different. Hence, the nutritional value of proteins depends on their amino acid contents.

Page |9
Fats:
Oil and fats serve mainly as the source of energy and they contain some essential nutrients like
essential fatty acids and fat soluble vitamins. Fat is essential for maintaining good health as
absence of fat leads to the development of a deficiency disease affecting the skin known as
Phyrnoderma.
Minerals:
The body contains about 24 minerals all of which are derived from the diet. The important
minerals are calcium, phosphorous, potassium, sodium, chloride, magnesium, iron, copper, iodine,
fluorine and zinc.
The minerals are essential for various body functions –
i) Calcium and phosphorous for the formation of bones and teeth.
ii) Sodium, potassium, chlorine and phosphorous for maintaining water balance in the body.
iii) Iron and copper for the formation of haemoglobin.
iv) Iron for the normal functioning of thyroid gland.
Diets should, therefore provide adequate amounts of all the minerals.
Vitamins:
The food group contains certain chemical substances in small amounts which are called as
Vitamins. About 17 different vitamins are discovered. All of them are essential for normal
functioning of the human body. Inadequate intake of vitamins will lead to the development of
deficiency diseases.
Vitamins are classified into two types –
i) Fat soluble vitamins such as Vit. A, D, E and K.
ii) Water soluble vitamins such as Vit. B1, Riboflavin, Vit. B6, Niacin, Panthothenic acid, Folic
acid, Vit. C etc.
Water:
Water is often called the “forgotten nutrient.” Water is needed to replace body fluids lost
primarily in urine and sweat. A person can survive weeks without food but only days without
water. Water makes up 70 percent of body weight and is found in every cell in the body. It is the
medium through which nutrients are transported from the digestive tract to the cells where they
are needed.
Five Food Group Plan:
Foods are grouped on the basis of the predominant nutrients present in them. They may be
classified into three, four, five, seven or eleven food groups. This classification varies from one
country to another depending on many factors. For example, in India we do not have milk and
milk products or flesh foods as a separate food group because of religion, economic reasons etc.

P a g e | 10
The five food group classification is used in India by ICMR as a guide to meal planning. Many
factors have been considered while compiling these groups such as availability of food, cost, meal
pattern and deficiency diseases prevalent. Not all foods in each group are equal in their nutrient
content. That is why a variety of foods from each group should be included in the diet.
A classification based on nutrients present will ensure that all nutrients are made available to the
body and offer greater variety within the group. The five basic food groups are –
1) Cereal and millets group
2) Protein or body building food group
3) Protective food group
4) Secondary protective food group
5) Fats and oils, sugar and jaggery group.
Significance of the five-food group system:
The five food group system/plan permits an individual to plan a menu to achieve nutrient intake
as specified by RDA.
i) Tool for nutritional assessment and screenings :
A brief dietary history system can disclose inadequacies of nutrient from any of the five
groups. The information can be the first clue for the possibility of the subject may be act the
risk of developing nutritional deficiency.
ii) Tool for nutritional counseling :
The dietary history based on the five food group system allows a health team to counsel or
teach a patient about nutrition.
Food Group

Sources
All cereal and their products such as
Wheat, rice, maize, millets such as
Cereal and
jowar, bajra, ragi (Nagali), semolina,
Millets
poha, bread, noodles, pizza, puffed
cereals
i) Yellow, orange and red fruits and
vegetables such as mango,
papaya, carrots, pumpkin. Green
Protective
leafy vegetables such as spinach,
Foods
fenugreek (clove), colocasia.
ii) All citrus fruits, guava, tomato,
pineapple, amia.
i) All pulses, nuts and oilseeds such
as Bengal gram, green gram, red
Protein or body
gram, black gram, lentil (Masur),
building foods
soyabeans, sprouts, groundnuts,
sesame (Til), almonds.

Main Nutrients
Carbohydrates, partially complete
proteins, fibre (except rice), Bcomplex vitamins, some are rich in
iron or calcium.
i) Rich source of carotene, iron,
folic acid, fibre, other vitamins
and minerals.

ii) Rich source of ascorbic acid
i) Partially
complete
proteins,
carbohydrates, iron, B-complex
vitamins B1, B2, niacin. Soya bean
and oilseeds provides fat. Sprouts
provide vitamin C.

P a g e | 11

Secondary
protective
group

Fats and oils,
sugar and
jaggery

ii) Milk and milk products such as ii) Complete
protein,
calcium,
whole milk, skim milk, curds,
phosphorous, fat, vitamins A, B2,
paneer, cheese, ice cream,
B12, cholesterol.
buttermilk.
iii) Meat, fish, poultry, egg.
iii) Protein, iron, fat, cholesterol,
vitamins A, B1, B2, B12, niacin.
i) All other fruits and vegetables not i) Carbohydrates,
fibre,
small
included in protective food group
amounts
of
vitamins
and
such as brinjal, beans, gourd
minerals.
vegetables, lady’s finger, potato,
onion yarn, colocasia, radish,
beetroot.
ii) Banana, apple, chikoo, grapes, ii) Carbohydrates,
fibre,
small
melons, pears.
amounts
of
vitamins
and
minerals.
i) All fats such as vanaspati, i) Calories, oils provide vitamin E
margarine, shortenings, fresh
and essential fatty acids.
cream, non dairy cream, butter,
clarified butter.
ii) All oils such as groundnut, corn, ii) Fats provide vitamins A and D.
soya, rice bran, sesame, salad, oil,
olive oil, fish oils.
iii) Sugar,
jaggery,
honey, iii) Only calories. Jaggery, honey
molasses, chocolates,
jam,
and preserves give very small
jellies, marmalade.
amounts of minerals.

Balanced Diet:
A balanced diet means getting the right types and amounts of foods and drinks to supply nutrition
and energy for maintaining body cells, tissues, and organs, and for supporting normal growth and
development.
A diet which contains all the nutrients e.g. energy, proteins, fats, vitamins, minerals etc. required
by a child for the proper maintenance of health and optimum growth is termed as a 'balanced
diet'. Dals and beans have high contents of protein and a small amount of fat. Bread is rich in
carbohydrates but poor in proteins.
A balanced diet and physical exercise has a major role in achieving long healthy life.
1. It helps in controlling body weight, heart rate and BP.
2. Increase in exercise capacity and muscle performance.
3. Improves blood sugar, lowers harmful cholesterol and triglycerides and increases the
beneficial HDL cholesterol.
4. Produces mental and physical relaxation.
Some Greek Philosopher said "Leave your drugs in the chemist's pot if you can heal the patient
with food." Scientifically, food is divided into five major groups, each group provide some but not

P a g e | 12
all the nutrients we need. Each food group is as important as another, no one can replace other.
For good health, we need them all. The groups of food that make up a good diet and how much
we need to eat from each group, which food we should eat more or less are as follows.
1. Vegetables, 2. Fruits, 3. Milk, Yogurt and Cheese, 4. Meat, Poultry, Fish, Dry Beans, Eggs,
Nuts, Oilseeds and Sweets, 5. Bread, Cereal, Rice and Pasta, 6. Water
Vegetables
Vegetables in daily meals are very important. They are naturally low in fat and also provide fiber.
Vegetables help to keep balance between the fluids of the body. They provide vitamins A and C
and minerals, such as iron, magnesium and foliate. Vegetables also provide carbohydrates for the
energy.
A small quantity of meat, eggs, milk or cheese mixed up with variety and combinations of
vegetables provide the full range of amino acids, proteins, carbohydrates, vitamins and minerals.
Carrots are a good source of vitamin A, tomatoes and cauliflower for vitamin C. Bunches of dark
green vegetables (spinach) help keep you healthy. 3 to 5 servings of vegetables are an important
part of a healthy diet.
If you're trying to lose weight or maintain your current weight while eating vegetarian meals, aim
to fill half your plate with one or two of the following low-calorie vegetables: tomatoes, spinach,
salad, carrots, broccoli, cauliflower, green beans, asparagus or bell peppers.
Starchy vegetables should not be used to fill half the plate, since they have about triple the
calories of low-calorie vegetables. Starchy vegetables include green peas, corn, potatoes, sweet
potatoes and winter squashes.
A serving of vegetables includes:
• 1 cup of raw, leafy vegetables;
• 1/2 cup of other vegetables cooked or chopped raw;
• 3/4 cup of vegetable juice.
Fruit Group
Fruits are wonderful because they are low in fat and sodium and provide important vitamins that
keep you feeling fine and looking good. Fruit and fruit juices provide important amounts of
vitamins A and C and potassium. Fruits also give you carbohydrates and all fruit is full of fiber. 2
to 4 daily servings of fruit play a big role in a good diet. Fruits are protective and regulatory in
nature.

A serving of fruit includes:
• one medium apple or banana or orange.
• 1/2 cup chopped, cooked or canned raw fruit

P a g e | 13
• 3/4 cup of fruit juice.
Milk and Cheese Group
Milk products provide protein, vitamins and minerals. Eating and drinking milk and cheese is the
best way to get your daily calcium. The most critical time to fill your bones with calcium is in
your teen-age years. If you don't provide your body with sufficient calcium in your teens, your
bones will be less dense throughout your life.
2 to 3 servings of this group are enough for healthy body. 2 servings are enough for most people
and 3 for women who are pregnant or breastfeeding, teenagers and young adults to age 24. This
food group helps in body building and gives energy to your body.
Cow's milk, buffalo milk, goat's milk, butter, ghee, paneer, cheese, kheer, payasam, rabdi, basundi
and similar foods comes in this group.
A serving of milk includes:
• 1 cup (236 milliliters) of milk or yogurt
• 1 ounce (28 grams) of cheese
• 1 1/2 cups of ice cream or ice milk.
Meat, Poultry, Fish, Dry Beans, Eggs and Nuts Group
Meat, poultry, and fish supply protein, vitamin B, iron, and zinc. The other foods in this group dry beans, eggs, and nuts - are similar to meats in providing protein and most vitamins and
minerals. Mutton, chicken, eggs and all edible birds, fish, crab, lobsters and shrimp are examples
of Meat, Poultry and Seafood; they are major source of protein and also provide significant
amount of fat.
Groundnut, cashew nut, walnut and badam are examples of Nuts and Oilseeds. They are major
source of fats and also provide protein.
2 to 3 servings from this group is sufficient for healthy body. This food group helps in body
building and energy storing.
A serving of food from this group includes:
• 56 to 85 grams of cooked lean meat, poultry, or fish.
• 1/2 cup of cooked dry beans, 1 egg, or 2 tablespoons of peanut butter count as • 1 ounce of lean
meat.
Fats, Oils and Sweets
Groundnut oil, coconut oil, sesame oil, sunflower oil, safflower oil, butter and ghee. Fat can be
visible fat, like oil. There is also invisible fat that cannot be seen but is consumed. For example,
nuts and oil seeds also contain fat. Fat could be vegetable fat or animal fat. Our body needs fats
for some things, but it's smart to avoid eating too much of it. This food group has more calories
than nutrition so we should always use it sparingly.

P a g e | 14
Sugary foods like candy and cookies are simple carbohydrates that can give you quick energy,
they are usually loaded with calories and don't offer much in the way of nutrients.
Bread, Cereal, Rice and Pasta Group
The foods in this group should make up the biggest part of your total diet that is 6 to 11 servings
in a day. These foods provide complex carbohydrates (starches), which are an important source of
energy, especially in low fat diets. They also provide vitamins, minerals, fiber and some iron.
Bread, cereal, rice, and pasta are all great sources of carbohydrate, the nutrient that the body uses
as its major energy source.
The final quarter of your balanced vegetarian plate should be made up of whole grains. Choose
whole grains over white, processed grains. Whole grains contain high fiber, so they are more
filling and don't raise blood-sugar levels as much as other carbohydrates do. Also they have more
disease-fighting phytochemicals.
Cereal and Millet:
This group includes rice, wheat, ragi, bajra, jowar, corn and all products made from them like
cereal flakes, puffed cereals, noodles, macaroni, bread, pizza bread and cakes. A major source of
carbohydrates and also provides fat. They give energy to body.
Pulse, Lentil and Legume:
Some examples are black, red and green gram, Bengal gram, cowpea, peas and rajma. They help
in body building, a major source of protein and also provide fat and carbohydrate.
A serving of grains includes:
• 1 slice of bread
• 118 milliliters of cooked rice or pasta
• 28 grams of ready to eat cereal
Water
Water is often called the “forgotten nutrient.” Water is needed to replace body fluids lost
primarily in urine and sweat. A person can survive weeks without food but only days without
water. Water makes up 70 percent of body weight and is found in every cell in the body. It is the
medium through which nutrients are transported from the digestive tract to the cells where they
are needed.
Water is also the medium through which the by-products of cell metabolism are removed. Water
also serves as the medium in which the chemical processes of life take place. It is normally taken
into the body in beverages, soups and in the form of solid foods. Fluid needs are increased with
sweating, vomiting, diarrhea, high-protein diets and in hot environments. An insufficient intake
may cause dehydration, evidenced by loss of weight, increased body temperature, and dizziness.
A serving of water includes:

P a g e | 15
• Six to eight glasses of water should be ingested a day.
To make a complete, nutritious meal :
i) Keep all the food groups in mind, you need them for the vitamins, minerals,
carbohydrates and protein they provide.
ii) Make sure you choose something from the Grains group at every meal: this is the main source
of energy for your body!
iii) Choose at least one fruit or vegetable at every meal: this will help to ensure you get the
minimum number of daily servings
iv) To complete your meal, add a Milk or Meat/Alternative food... even better,
add both!
v) So...are you getting the 20 essential amino acids, 14 essential minerals and 13 essential
vitamins in your daily diet to insure your "good health"?

Fig. : Balanced Diet Pyramid

Food Group
Vegetables
(Green leafy)

Sources
Amarnath, Spinach,
coriander leaves,

No. of Serving
1 cup of raw,
leafy vegetables

Main Nutrients
Invisible fat, calcium
fibre, carotenoids,

P a g e | 16
mustard leaves.
Other vegetables

Carrot, brinjal, lady
finger, beans, onion,
capsicum, cauliflower

Fruits

apples, guava, tomato
ripe, papaya, orange,
sweet lime, water
melon
Milk, skimmed milk
and cheese.
Liver, fish, eggs, meat

Milk and
meat products
Meat and
chicken
Pulses

Cereals,
grains
and
products
Fat
and
sugar

Sugar
Water

1/2 cup of other
vegetables cooked or
chopped raw
vegetables
one medium apple or
banana or orange

2 servings per day
one serving per day

Legumes, Bengal gram, one serving per day
black gram, green gram,
red gram, rajmah,
soyabean.
Rice wheat flour,
6-7 servings per day
maize, rice flakes,
puffed rice and maida.

butter, ghee,
hydrogenated oils,
cooking oils like ground
nut, mustard and
coconut oil
sugar and jaggery
Beverages, soups and in
the form of solid foods

Vitamin B2, folic acid
and iron.
Carotenoids, folic
acid, calcium fibre.

Fibre, Vitamin C,
carotenoids.

Protein, fat, Vitamin
B2, calcium.
Protein, fat and
Vitamin B2.
Energy, protein,
invisible fats, Vitamin
B, B2, folic acid,
calcium, iron, fibre.
Energy, protein,
invisible fat, Vitamin
B, B2, folic acid, iron
and fibre.

Fat – 3 tsp/day

Energy, fats and
essential fatty acids.

2 tablespoon/day
Six to eight glasses in
a day

Energy.
Medium for
transportation of
nutrients.

BALANCED DIETS FOR ADULTS
Food item

Adult Man
Sedentary Moderate

Adult Woman
Heavy Sedentary Moderate Heavy

P a g e | 17

Cereals and millets
Pulses
Leafy vegetables
Other vegetables
Roots and tubers
Fruits
Milk
Fats and oils
Sugar / Jaggery

work
470
40
100
60
50
30
150
30
30

work
550
60
100
70
60
30
200
40
40

work
750
60
100
80
80
30
250
45
50

work
370
40
100
40
50
30
100
20
25

work
450
45
100
40
50
30
150
25
30

work
575
50
100
50
60
30
200
30
30

BALANCED DIETS FOR CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS
Children
Age in years
1-3 4-6 7-9

Adolescents
Age in years
Food Groups
10-12
13-15
16-18
Boys Girls Boys Girls Boys Girls
Cereals and millets
180 275 285 335
300
410
340
460
325
Pulses
25 35 60
60
60
60
60
60
50
Leafy vegetables
40 50 50
75
75
100
100
100
100
Other vegetables
20 30 50
50
50
75
75
75
75
Roots and tubers
10 20 30
30
30
50
50
50
50
Fruits
50 50 50
50
50
50
50
50
50
Milk
300 250 200 200
200
200
200
200
200
Fats and oils
15 25 30
30
30
50
40
50
40
Sugar / Jaggery
30 40 50
40
40
40
40
50
50
(For non-vegetarians substitute one pulse portion with one portion (50 g) of egg / meat / chicken /
fish.)
Units of Energy:
The energy or calorific value of foods depends on the quantity of carbohydrates, fats and proteins
present in them. This can be determined by oxidizing a known weight of food in an instrument
called as Bomb calorimeter and measuring the heat produced.
The energy value of foods can be expressed in terms of kilo calories (Kcal) or mega joules (MJ).
The unit Kilo Calorie has been in use till now. The International Union of Nutritional Sciences
has suggested the use of Mega Joule (MJ) as the energy unit in place of Kcal.
Kilo Calorie : 1 kilogram calorie is the quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of 1 kg of
water through 1oC. It is 1,000 times the small calorie used in physics.
Mega Joule : 1 kilo calorie equals 4.186 kilo joules.
Hence, 1,000 kilo calorie = 4.186 x 103 kilo joules or 4.186 mega joules.
1 Mega joule = 1,000 kilo joules
1 Mega joule = 239 Kcal
1 Kilo calorie = 4.186 kilo joules.

P a g e | 18
Direct and Indirect Calorimetry:
The metabolism of proteins, fats and carbohydrates in the body liberates energy which is used for
work and maintenance of body temperature. Ultimately the energy output can be measured as heat
output from the body. In a healthy adult man, since the heat output has to be replaced by
furnishing equivalent amount of calories in food, the calorie requirement can be measured by
measuring the calorie output.
The energy content of various foods can be measured by Direct calorimetry and by Indirect
calorimetry.
Direct Calorimetry:
Measurement of heat actually produced by the organism which is confined in a sealed chamber or
calorimeter. To measure heat by direct calorimetry, Atwater-Rosa-Benedict Respiration
calorimeter is used.
Atwater-Rosa-Benedict Respiration Calorimeter:
The relation between energy output and oxygen consumed has been using the human respiration
calorimeter.
This equipment consists of an air tight copper chamber insulated by wooden walls with air space
in between. A folding bed, chair and table are provided in the chamber. A man can comfortably
stay in the calorimeter for a few days and do some work such as reading, writing etc. A small
opening is provided at the two ends for passing foods and drinks and removing the excreta. The
chamber is ventilated by a current of air; the CO2 and water given off are removed by soda lime
and sulphuric acid respectively. Oxygen utilized by the subject is replaced by introducing known
amounts of oxygen through gas meter into the chamber with air current.
From the above, the quantity of oxygen consumed and CO2 produced can be calculated. The heat
produced is measured accurately by circulating a current of water through copper pipes and
measuring the quantity of water that has been circulated through the chamber and also the
difference between the temperature of the water entering and leaving the chamber.
Exa. –
Adult weight

= 65 kg

Amount of heat output in 24 hrs.

= 2400 kcal

Amount of oxygen consumed in 24 hrs.

= 500 liters

Heat output per litre of oxygen consumed

= 4.8 kcal

Indirect Calorimetry:

P a g e | 19
Estimation of the heat produced by means of respiratory differences of oxygen and carbon dioxide
in the inspired or expired air. For this reason, indirect calorimetry is considered to be the Gold
standard for assessing energy expenditure in hospitalized patients. Indirect calorimetry uses a pain
free breath test to precisely measure individual’s unique metabolic characteristics.
To measure heat by indirect calorimetry, Oxy calorimeter is used.
Oxy Calorimeter:
It was devised by Benedict and coworkers. This instrument measures the volume of oxygen
required to burn a known weight of the food.
The apparatus consists of combustion chamber, in which the weighed sample is burnt, a soda lime
container for absorption of CO2, a spirometer for measuring the O2 used and a motor-blower unit
for a circulating the gas mixture.
Using this instrument, the amount of O2 consumed in burning of 1 g of pure carbohydrate, fat or
protein can be determined.
The bomb calorimeter measures the heat produced when a food is actually burned where as the
oxy calorimeter measures the oxygen used and CO2 produced during the burning of a food.
BMR and Factors Affecting BMR:
The amount of energy required by the body for carrying out involuntary work and maintaining the
body temperature is known as the Basal Metabolic Rate (BMR).
The involuntary work includes the functioning of various organs and systems which work
continuously to keep the body processes going such as the heart and blood circulation, the kidneys
and excretion. Approximately 1/3 of this energy is needed for these processes while the remaining
2/3 is utilized for maintenance of muscle tone.
Determination of Basal Metabolism:
Basal metabolism is usually determined by using Benedict and Roth apparatus. The apparatus is a
closed circuit system in which the subject breathes in oxygen from a metal cylinder of about 6 lit.
capacity and CO2 produced is absorbed by soda lime present in the tower. The oxygen cylinder
floats on water present in an outer tank. The subject wears a nose clip and breathes through a
mouthpiece the oxygen present in the in the cylinder for a period of 6 minutes. The volume of O2
used is recorded on a graph paper attached to a revolving drum by a pen attached to it. Since the
subject is in the post-absorptive state. R.Q. is assumed to be 0.82 and the calorific value of one
litre of O2 consumed is taken as 4.8 Kcal.

Exa. –

P a g e | 20
Subject : Adult male, 50 kg body weight.
Oxygen consumed in 6 minutes = 1.1 litres.
Heat produced in 6 minutes = 4.8 x 1.1
= 5.28 Kcal.
Heat produced in 24 hours

= 5.2 x 60 x 24
= 1,267 Kcal.

The basal metabolism of the individual for 24 hours = 1,267 Kcal.
Factors Affecting BMR:
1) Body size: Heat is continuously lost through the skin. A tall well built person has a greater
skin surface area than a shorter or smaller person and loses more heat through the skin and
hence has a greater BMR.
2) Body composition: The amount of muscle tissue and adipose or fatty tissue in the body
affects BMR. An athlete with ell built muscles and little body fat has a higher BMR than a
non-athlete with more body fat of the same weight. The metabolic activity in muscle tissue is
much more as compared to adipose or fatty tissue.
3) Age: During periods of rapid growth, the BMR increases by 15-20% because the growth
hormone stimulates cell metabolism and new cells are formed. It is high during infancy, preschool years and puberty. During pregnancy and lactation it rapidly increases once again. The
BMR gradually declines with age at the rate of 2% for each decade after the age of 21 years.
4) Sex: The BMR is 10% higher in males as compared to females. The difference in BMR is
attributed to a higher proportion of adipose tissue in females and hormonal variations between
the sexes.
5) Fever: Fever increases the BMR by 7% for each degree Fahrenheit rise in bofy temperature.
This is one of the reasons for loss of weight during fever.
6) State of Health: The BMR is low during starvation and malnutrition because reduction in
muscle tissue. In diseases and conditions where catabolic processes are high such as cancers,
tuberculosis and burns BMR is high.
7) Hormones: Disorders of the thyroid gland markedly influence the BMR. Hyperthyroidism, a
condition of excessive production of thyroid hormone increases BMR, and Hypothyroidism or
decreased production of thyroid hormone decreases BMR.
8) Exercise: Physical exercise not only influences body weight by burning calories, it also
increases BMR.
9) Climate: BMR rises when the climate is cold in order to maintain normal body temperature.
In very warm climates leading to profuse sweating, MBR may increase by trying to reduce
body temperature.

P a g e | 21
10) Psychological Tension: Worry and anxiety increase BMR.
Specific Dynamic Action (SDA):
Specific Dynamic Action (SDA) is a term used to describe the effect of food has in increasing the
metabolic rate above the level found when fasting. Energy is needed to digest, absorb and
metabolize the food we eat. Food intake stimulates the metabolism process leading to an increase
in energy expenditure. This is known as the thermogenic effect of food or the specific dynamic
effect.
Proteins have maximum effect on SDA, increasing the BMR by about 30% when eaten alone,
while carbohydrates and fats show smaller increases. When eaten together in a normal mixed diet,
the increase is about 5-10% of basal metabolism.
Rubner observed that, carbohydrates, fat and protein fed to a fasting dog, stimulated the energy
metabolism over the basal level to varying extent. He found that, in a fasting dog requiring 400
Kcal, feeding of 100 gm of carbohydrates produces 425 Kcal, 44.4 gm fat produces 416 Kcal and
100 gm of protein produces 520 Kcal heat. The extra heat produced is given by the oxidation of
tissue constituents and the animal will be in negative energy balance.
This stimulating effect of carbohydrate, fat and proteins on energy metabolism is called as
Specific Dynamic Action (SDA).
The SDA of protein is the highest (30%), while that of carbohydrate and fat is only 6% and 4%
respectively. The SDA of mixed diet containing 80 gm carbohydrates, 10 gm fats and 10 gm
proteins is about 8%.
Respiratory Quotient:
During aerobic respiration oxygen is consumed and carbon dioxide is evolved. The ratio of the
amount of carbon dioxide produced to the amount of oxygen consumed in a given time is called
Respiratory quotient (RQ).
Amount of CO2 produces in a given time
RQ

=

Amount of O2 consumed in a given time
RQ is determined with the help of an apparatus called Respirometer. The RQ depends upon the
type of respiratory substrate used during respiration. It is different for different substrates
For carbohydrates this ratio is one, for proteins and fat this ratio is always less than one. Thus by
calculating ratio of CO2 produced and O2 consume one can predict the type of quality of food.
If diet consists of high carbohydrates then RQ is closed to one. If diet contains more fat then RQ
is around 0.74 and if diet contains more proteins them it is around 0.8. In this way by knowing
RQ one can find out quality of food consumed by animal.
Carbohydrates:
The value of RQ is equal to 1 if carbohydrates are the respiratory substrates in aerobic respiration.

P a g e | 22

Fats:
When the respiratory substrate is fat the RQ is about 0.7
Example – Tripalmitin

Fats contain less oxygen than carbohydrates and so they require more oxygen for oxidation
Proteins:
Protein is not completely oxidized in the tissues but its R.Q. can be determined by indirect means
and it is in between 0.8 to 0.82.
Organic acids
When organic acids are broken down as respiratory substrates under aerobic conditions the RQ is
more than one. Organic acids contain more oxygen than carbohydrates and therefore require less
oxygen for their oxidation
Example –

Anaerobic Respiration:
The value of RQ is infinity during anaerobic respiration because CO2 is produced but O2 is not
utilized

P a g e | 23

From the R.Q. a rough idea about the kind of diet utilized, can be received because it is likely that
other substances may be metabolized and there is also a possibility of interconversion of food
substances within the body of animal. From the above mentioned figures it can be said that.
Omnivorous diet should be represented by an R.Q. about 0.85 while a high carbohydrate diet
gives a figure above 0.9. It cautiously measured R.Q. exceeds unity (i.e. 1). It indicates that fats
must have been formed from carbohydrates. Conversely, R.Q. below 0.7 indicates that
carbohydrates must have been formed from fat.
Normal R.Q. for man is 0.85 suggesting that carbohydrate is an important source of energy, but
that either fat or protein or both as well as are used.
If O2 is taken as a unit, the energy available from three food stuffs does not vary much.
1 gm of O2 oxidises carbohydrate to give 3.8 Kcal.
1 gm of O2 oxidises fat to give 3.2 Kcal.
1 gm of O2 oxidised protein to give 3.1 kcal.
However, 1 gm of O2 can oxidize 0.94 gm glucose or 0.34 gm Triesterin. Thus 1 gm of glucose
gives 4.1 Kcal energy while the same amount of fat provides 9.3 kcal. Fat is therefore a more
economical form to store energy. For the very reason hibernating or migratory animals lay down
much fat earlier. Protein can produce about 4 Kcal/gm.
Food Nutrition and Health:
To live one must eat. But, we not only eat to live, what we eat also affects our ability to keep
healthy, do work, to be happy and to live well. Knowledge of what to eat and in what quantities is
a prerequisite to the healthy and happy life.
Nutrition is the science that deals with all the various factors of which food is composed and the
way in which proper nourishment is brought about. The average nutritional requirements of
groups of people are fixed and depend on such as age, sex, height, weight, degree of activity and
rate of growth.
Food is anything solid or liquid that has a chemical composition which enables it, when
swallowed to do one or more of the following
1. Provide the body with the material from which it can produce heat or any form of energy.
2. Provide material to allow growth, maintenance, repair or reproduction to proceed.
3. Supply substances, which normally regulate the production of energy or the process of
growth, repair or reproduction.
Good nutrition requires a satisfactory diet, which is capable of supporting the individual
consuming it, in a state of good health by providing the desired nutrients in required amounts. It

P a g e | 24
must provide the right amount of fuel to execute normal physical activity. If the total amount of
nutrients provided in the diet is insufficient, a state of under nutrition will develop.
The council on Food and Nutrition of the American Medical Association defines nutrition as “The
science of foods, the nutrients and the substances therein, their action, interaction and balance in
relation to health and diseases. Nutrition science is the area of knowledge regarding the role of
food in the maintenance of good health. Thus nutrition is the study of food at work in our body.
Health is defined by the World Health Organization of the United Nations as the “State of
complete physical, mental and social well- being and not merely the absence of disease and
infirmity (or ill- health/illness)”
Nutrition is one key to developing and maintaining a state of health that is optimal for you. In
addition, a poor diet coupled with a sedentary lifestyle is known to be risk factors for lifethreatening chronic diseases like Heart disease, Stroke, Hypertension, Diabetes and some forms of
Cancer and finally death. The major health problems in the Unites States are largely caused by
excessive energy intake and not enough physical activity.
An adequate diet should contain liberal amounts of protein-rich and protective foods and should
apply all the dietary essentials in the required amounts. Dietary surveys carried out in Western
countries have shown that the diets contain large amounts of protein-rich and protein foods such
as milk, eggs, meat and fish and provide all the nutrients in adequate amounts. The rate of growth
of children and the nutritional status of the population are very good.
Studies carried out in U.K. and U.S.A has been shown that the quality of diets consumed by the
people during the period of 1910-1960 has been steadily improving and consequently the growth
rate of children has been steadily increasing during the above period. After 1960, there has been
no further significant increase in the growth rate of children indicating thereby that the diets have
been adequate for promoting maximum growth in children.
On the other hand, the diets consumed by a majority of the population in developing countries of
Asia, Africa and Latin America are based mainly on energy yielding foods and contain only small
amounts of protective and protein-rich foods. Such diets are deficient in proteins, certain vitamins
and minerals. A fair section of the population does not get enough food to eat and their diets are
deficient in calories also. The rate of growth of children in developing countries is poor. The
children are malnourished, emaciated and stunted.
Studies carried out in several nutrition research laboratories in India and other countries have
shown that supplementation of the diets with extra cereals, legumes and green leafy vegetables or
with processed food supplements based on cereals, oilseed meals and essential vitamins and
minerals can help effectively to overcome malnutrition and improve health and nutritional status
of the population.

P a g e | 25
Nutrition is an input to and foundation for health and development. Interaction of infection and
malnutrition is well-documented. Better nutrition means stronger immune systems, less illness
and better health. Healthy children learn better. Healthy people are stronger, are more productive
and more able to create opportunities to gradually break the cycles of both poverty and hunger in
a sustainable way. Better nutrition is a prime entry point to ending poverty and a milestone to
achieving better quality of life.

Unit – 2
Carbohydrates and Proteins
CARBOHYDRATES:
Composition and Sources:

P a g e | 26
Carbohydrates provide fuel or energy for the human body. These organic (carbon -containing)
compounds are an integral part of both plant and animal life and life as we know it could not exist
without them.
Carbohydrates are made up of three elements - carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. Carbohydrates
along with proteins and fats comprise the major components of living matter and are used for
maintenance of cellular functional activities and as reserve and structural materials for cells.
Carbohydrates are formed by green plants in the process of photosynthesis. Humans get their
carbohydrate needs most efficiently from the plant world.
Sources of Carbohydrates:
Carbohydrates are one of the three major macro-nutrients which supply the body with energy. Fat
and protein are the others. It is recommended that about 55% of our daily calories should come
from carbohydrates, 15 % from protein and 30 % from fat.
Carbohydrates (sugar and starches) are the most efficient sources of energy and are known as the
“fuel of life.” Carbohydrates take the form of sugars, oligosaccharides, starches and fibres. The
major sources of carbohydrates are cereals, pulses, potatoes. But also fruit and vegetables contain
carbohydrates and even milk.
The new nutritional guidelines established by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
recommend that complex carbohydrates and naturally occurring sugars (found primarily in fruit)
make up approximately 50 percent of one’s total caloric intake. The FDA also recommends that
refined and processed sugars make up no more than 10 percent of the calories in one’s diet. Each
gram of carbohydrate yields 4 calories in the process of its metabolism.
Carbohydrates are abundantly found in most plant food sources. Complex carbohydrates
(starches) are in breads, cereals, pasta, rice, dry beans and peas and other vegetables, such as
potatoes and corn. Simple carbohydrates are found in sugars, honey, syrup, jam and many
desserts.
1) Cereals: Wheat, Rice, Jowar, Bajara, Ragi, Oats, barley, Corn etc.
2) Pulses: All whole grain and dehusked pulses and their by-products. Rajmah, Bengal gram,
Whole green gram, Lentils and besan.
3) Fruits and Vegetables: Mango, Chikoo, Jack fruit, Custard apple, Banana, Green peas, Beans,
Potato etc.
4) Nuts and Oilseeds: Cashew nuts, Coconut (dry), Ground nuts, Garden cress seeds, Gingelly
seeds.
5) Sweets: Sugar, Jaggery, Honey, Sago, Tapioca, Dates, Raisins, Skimmed milk powder.
Carbohydrate content of some foods:
Name of food

Carbohydrates g/100 g

P a g e | 27
Cereals and millets (Rice, Jowar etc)
Pulses (Bengal gram, Red gram etc)
Nuts and Oilseeds
Roots and Tubers
(Potato, Tapioca, Sweet potato etc)
Arrow root flour
Cane sugar
Sago
Honey
Jaggery
Milk (Fluid)
Dried fruits (Raisin, Dates etc)
Fresh fruits

63-79
56-60
10-25
22-39
85-87
99
87-89
79-80
94-95
4-5
67-77
10-25

Nutritional Value/Energy value/Fuel Value of Carbohydrate:
Energy has traditionally been expressed as calories or kilocalories. More recently, the units of
energy have been changed to kilojoules. There are 4.2 kilojoules in 1 kilocalorie. The energy
value of a food indicates its value to the body as a fuel. This may be less than the heat value
obtained experimentally by 'burning' the food outside the body in what is called a 'bomb
calorimeter'. After a food is ingested, some of its energy may be 'lost' during digestion and
metabolism. The first system for giving energy values to the macronutrients was described by Dr
W. O. Atwater in 1899.
Energy requirement means the amount energy needed to maintain the basic processes of life at
rest, that is, basal metabolism, plus the amount needed for physical activity under a variety of
circumstances. Body weight is an important factor in determining how much energy we need,
since more energy will be needed to sustain and move a greater body mass.
kilojoules per gram kilocalories per gram
Fat
37
9
Alcohol
29
7
Protein
17
4
Carbohydrate
16
4

Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA):
For maintaining good health and physical efficiency, the diet should provide adequate amounts of
all nutrients. In designing balanced diets, it is essential to know the daily requirements of different
nutrients. Dietary Allowances for nutrients have been recommended by various National and
International Committees –

P a g e | 28
i)

Nutrition Expert Committee, I.C.M.R., India (1968),

ii)

Food and nutrition Board, National Research Centre, U.S.A. (1974),

iii)

Panel of Recommended Allowances of Nutrients, Department of Health and Social
Services, U.K. (1969) and

iv)

Human Nutritional Requirements, FAO/WHO (1974).

In estimating the calorie requirements the factors like Physical activity, Body size and
composition, Age and sex, Physiological state and Climate and environment are important. The
RDA is based on requirements.
The requirement for a particular nutrient is the minimum level that needs to be consumed to
perform specific functions in the body and to prevent deficiency symptoms. It should also
maintain satisfactory stores of the nutrients in the body.
Recommended Dietary Allowances are based on a person’s requirements for different nutrient.
Recommended Dietary Allowances = Requirement + Margin of safety.
The margin of safety is added to take care of factors such as,
i)

Losses during cooking and processing,

ii)

Short periods of deficient intake,

iii)

Nature of the diet,

iv)

Individual variations in requirements.

Exa. – i) The requirement for iron in Western countries is 10 mg for adult men and 15 mg for
adult women respectively while Indian RDA’s suggest an intake of 28 mg for adult men and 30
mg for adult woman. This is because the form of iron consumed varied and the factors interfering
with absorption of iron such phytates in cereals and larger proportions of non-haeme iron present
in Indian diets.
ii) The requirement for Vitamin C or Ascorbic acid is actually 20 mg, but since the vitamin is
easily destroyed during pre-preparation, cooking and storage, the recommended intake is
twice the requirement and is 40 mg/day.

Required Daily Allowances of Carbohydrates:
The body has a specific need for carbohydrates as a source of energy for the brain and other tissue
cells, for the synthesis of lactose of milk (lactating women) and galactose and other sugars present
in cerebrosides, muco-polysaccharides etc. Carbohydrate is essential for the oxidation of fat and
for the synthesis of certain non-essential amino acids.

P a g e | 29
The percentage of calories derived from carbohydrates in the diets consumed by a vast majority of
people in the developing countries is as high as 60-70 % while it is 40-50% in Europe and 3040% in U.S.A. The carbohydrate calories should be at least 40% in well balanced diets.
The level of carbohydrate calories in the diet will also depend on availability of fat and the
economic conditions of the people as fat is about twice as costly cereals on equicalorie basis in
developing countries.
The RDA for carbohydrates has been established at 130 grams per day. Approximately 55% of
the energy (Calories) in your diet should be from carbohydrates. Of course, carbohydrates from
fresh vegetables and fruits are the best source, along with carbohydrates from whole grains and
beans.
The Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) for carbohydrate:
RDA for Children
1–3 years
130 g/d of carbohydrate
4–8 years
130 g/d of carbohydrate
RDA for Boys
9–13 years
130 g/d of carbohydrate
14–18 years
130 g/d of carbohydrate
RDA for Girls
9–13 years
130 g/d of carbohydrate
14–18 years
130 g/d of carbohydrate
Optimal level of carbohydrates in the diet, taking into account the physiological needs for proteins
and fats:
Age Group
Adult
Expectant and nursing mothers
Infants (1-12 months)
Preschool children (1-5 years)
Older children and adolescents

Optimal level of carbohydrate
calories as % of total calories
50-70
40-60
40-50
40-60
50-70

Deficiency and Excess intake Disease:
Carbohydrates may directly influence human diseases by affecting physiological and metabolic
processes, thereby reducing risk factors for the disease or the disease process itself. Carbohydrates
may also have indirect effects on diseases, for example, by displacing other nutrients or
facilitating increased intakes of a wide range of other substances frequently found in

P a g e | 30
carbohydrate-containing foods. Evidence of associations between carbohydrates and diseases
comes from epidemiological and clinical studies.
Carbohydrates Deficiency Diseases:
The daily diet should not contain less than 100 g of carbohydrate. The carbohydrate deficiency is
uncommon in our country as diets are cereal based. A deficiency of carbohydrate in the diet
results in utilization of fat for energy. In severe deficiency, incomplete oxidation of fats caused
ketone bodies to accumulate in the blood, resulting in a condition called Ketosis.
Excess Carbohydrates Intake Diseases:
1) Excess consumption of refined sugars could be one of the causes of dental caries or tooth
decay.
2) Excess sugar depresses the appetite, provides hollow calories and could result in malnutrition.
3) High intake of sugar and refined carbohydrates increase the blood triglyceride levels leading
to heart diseases.
4) When excess carbohydrates are consumed they are converted into fat and deposited in the
adipose tissue, which could lead to obesity, i.e. body weight of 20 % or more than desirable
weight.
5) Excessive fibre could irritate the intestinal lining causing cramps or bloating due to gas
formation.
6) Excess fibre interferes with the absorption and availability of mineral elements such as iron
and calcium.
Biological Importance of Carbohydrates:
Carbohydrates play vital role in the human body.
1) The chief function of carbohydrate is to provide energy to the body so that it can carry out
day-to-day work and maintain body temperature. All carbohydrates except fibre provide 4
Kcal/g of energy. It is the cheapest source of energy available.
2) Glucose is the only form of energy used by the central nervous system. When blood glucose
level fall, the brain does not receive energy and convulsions may occur.
3) Carbohydrates spare proteins form being broken down for energy and are used for body
building and repair. In carbohydrate deficient diets, proteins meant for body building and
repair are oxidized to meet the most important and first need to the body, i.e. energy.
4) They are required for complete oxidation of fat. In a deficiency, fats are broken down rapidly
for energy and intermediate products such as ketones are formed in large amounts resulting in
a condition called as Ketosis.
5) Carbohydrates can be converted into non-essential amino acids, provided a source of nitrogen
is available.

P a g e | 31
6) The sugar lactose helps in the absorption of the minerals calcium and phosphorous.
7) Lactose helps certain bacteria to grow in the intestine. This bacterial flora is capable of
synthesizing B-complex vitamins in the gut.
8) Dietary fibre plays an important role of increasing faecal mass by absorbing and holding
water, stimulating peristalsis and eliminating faecal waste.
9) Fibre also helps in lowering blood cholesterol levels by binding bile acids and cholesterol.

PROTEINS:
Composition and Sources:
Proteins are large, complex, organic compounds made up of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and
nitrogen. The basic unit of protein is amino acid. Each amino acid contains a carboxyl group
(COOH) and acid group and an amino group (NH2) or basic group.
Classification of proteins:
Proteins may be classified 1) on the basis of their structure and 2) on the basis of their quality or
nutrition value i.e. the amino acids present in them.
1) Classification of proteins by Structure:
On the basis of structure proteins are classified into three types –
i) Simple Protein:
These proteins are made up of amino acids only. Exa. – Zein in corn, Albumin in egg white and
Gliadin in wheat consists of amino acids only.
iii) Conjugated Proteins:
These proteins have a non-protein molecule attached to the protein. Exa. – Blood protein
haemoglobin, which contains a haeme (iron) group attached to protein and milk protein casein,
which has a phosphate group attached.
iv) Derived Proteins:
These result from a partial breakdown of a native protein. Proteases, peptones and polypeptides
are formed when digestive enzymes begin their action on proteins.

2) Classification of Proteins by Nutrition or Quality:
Proteins are classified into three groups on the basis of their nutrition or quality.
i) First Class Protein or Complete Proteins:

P a g e | 32
These proteins contain all essential amino acids in sufficient proportions and amounts to meet the
body’s need for growth and repair of tissue cells. A complete protein food has a high BV. They
are found in animal foods.
Exa. – Eggs, milk, meat, fish and poultry are complete protein foods.
ii) Second Class Protein or Partially Complete Proteins:
These are proteins in which one or more essential amino acids are present in inadequate amounts.
They cannot synthesize tissues without the help of other proteins. The value of each is increased
when it is consumed in combination with another incomplete protein at the same meal. They can
maintain life. They are found in plant foods. Exa. – Cereals, pulses, nuts and oilseed are partially
complete protein foods. Cereals contain inadequate amounts of essential amino acid lysine and
pulses are deficient in essential amino acid, methionine.
iii) Incomplete Proteins:
These proteins are incapable of growth and repair of body cells. They cannot maintain life. One or
more essential amino acids may be completely lacking in these proteins. Exa. – Gelatin and Zein
in corn. Gelatin lacks three essential amino acids and is the only animal protein which is
incomplete.
Sources of Proteins:
Protein is the basic material of every living cell. It is the only nutrient that can make new cells and
rebuild tissues. Therefore, adequate amount of protein in diet is essential for normal growth and
development and for the maintenance of health.
No two food proteins are identical in their quality. The quality of protein depends upon the kind
and amount of amino acids present in them in relation to the body needs. Protein quality is an
important criterion for tissue synthesis. Each body protein performs a specific function and cannot
be replaced by another protein.
Proteins are present in both plant and animal foods. Animal food sources provide the highest
quality or complete proteins such as eggs, milk and milk products – cheese, paneer, mawa, milk
powder, curds, condensed milk; meat, fish, shell fish, poultry and organ meats.
Pulses, especially soya bean (43% protein) and its products such soya milk, tofu textured
vegetable proteins, nuts and oilseeds – groundnut and gingelly seeds are important sources of
protein in Indian diet. Cereals contain 6-12% partially complete proteins and as they form the
bulk of the diet, they contribute significantly to the protein content. Vegetables, with the
exception of peas and beans are poor sources of protein. Green leafy vegetables contain a small
percentage of good quality protein (approximately 1-3%). Fruits do not contribute towards the
protein content of the diet.
The average adult needs about half a gram of protein per pound of healthy weight.

P a g e | 33
Sources
Eggs - 1 medium size
Milk - 1pint or 568 ml
Milk - 1 glass
Soya milk plain - 200 ml
Tofu - 100 gm
Low-fat yoghurt (Plain) - 150 g
Low-fat-yoghurt (Fruit) - 150 g
Fish (Cod fillets) - 100g or 3.5 ounces
Cheese cheddar - 100g or 3.5 ounces
Roast Beef - 100 g or 3.5 ounces
Roast Chicken - 100 g or 3.5 ounces
Other meats Average - 100g or 3.5 ounces
Lentils, cooked - 1 cup
Black Beans, cooked - 1 cup
Peanut butter - 1 tbsp
Almonds - ¼ cup
Brown Rice, cooked - 1 cup
Broccoli, cooked - 1 cup
Potato - 1 medium

Protein content in grams
6
19
6.3
6
8
8
6
21
25
28
25
25
18
15
8
8
5
4
4

Nutritional value/Energy value/Fuel value of Proteins:
A protein’s nutritional value is judged by how many of the essential amino acids it provides and
in what quantity. Different foods contain different numbers and amounts of amino acids.


Animal products (such as chicken, beef or fish) contain all of the essential amino acids.



Plant proteins usually lack at least one amino acid. Exceptions to this are soy products and
the seed of a leafy green called Amaranth (consumed in Asia and the Mediterranean).

Strict vegetarians can solve this dietary problem by eating a combination of plant foods. For
example, a meal containing cereals and legumes provides all the essential amino acids found in a
typical meat dish.
Required Daily or Recommended Dietary Allowances of Proteins:
Many factors affect the protein requirement of an individual such as, body weight, special
physiological needs, adequacy of calorie intake, quality of protein and efficiency of digestion,
previous state of nutrition.

Group
Man
Woman

Particulars
Adult
Adult
Pregnancy

Body weight (kg)
60
50

Protein (g/day)
60
50
+15

P a g e | 34

Infants
Children

Boys

Girls

Lactation (0-6 months)
(6-12 months)
0-6 months
6-12 months
1-3 years
4-6 years
7-9 years
10-12 years
13-15 years
16-18 years
10-12 years
13-15 years
16-18 years

5.4
8.6
12.2
19.0
26.9
35.4
47.8
57.1
31.5
46.7
49.9

+25
+18
2.05 g/kg
1.65 g/kg
22
30
41
54
70
78
57
65
63

Deficiency and Excess Intake Disease of Proteins:
For healthy growth of body, a balanced diet is a must. A balanced diet means a diet that consists
of vitamins, proteins, minerals, fats, carbohydrates and all other things that may be required to
maintain the proper functioning of every part of the body.
Proteins are one of the most vital substances required by the body to function properly. They
constitute 75% of the body mass and are present in each and every part of the body right from
hair, bones, skin, muscles and all other parts of the body. Proteins are the carriers of oxygen in the
blood and energy source for all the chemical reactions in the body.
While an excess of any of the above mentioned substances can cause disorders, shortage or
inadequate consumption can also cause serious disorders.
Protein Deficiency Diseases:
i)

A reduced protein intake over a prolonged period of time leads to loss of weight, fatigue,
anemia, nutritional oedema, lowered resistance to infection and poor healing of wounds.

ii)

Protein deficiency is more marked during periods when proteins needs are more e.g. during
infancy, childhood, pregnancy and lactation. Deficiency occurs when an individual does not
eat enough proteins.

iii)

It is one of the reasons for diseases like breast cancer, colon cancer, heart disease and
osteoporosis.

iv)

Congenital protein C or S deficiency causes abnormal blood clotting. This disorder causes
an increased risk of clot formation, called thrombosis.

v)

Inadequate supply of proteins in the food consumed among small children in the age group
of 1-3 years caused a disease called Kwashiorkor. A child suffering from this disease has a
very poor diet with stunted growth, bulging eyes, long curved thin legs, dark skin and luster
less hair.

P a g e | 35
The disease can be prevented or controlled by giving high protein diet to the patient with
lots of whole wheat, jaggery, gram, beans, peanut etc.
vi)

Protein energy malnutrition leads to Marasmus diseases. This is mainly caused in infants
and is due to deficiency in proteins and not the calories. This is more prevalent in
developing countries due to the early replacement of mother's milk with other sources of
food. The most common symptoms of the disease are that the infant develops a shriveled
look, the ribs become prominent and the limbs become very thin.
Severe diarrhea and other digestive disorders occur leading to a retarded physical and
mental growth. The disease can be prevented or controlled by administering a protein rich
diet like a combination of wheat, gram, peanut, soybean or a diet that has animal protein like
fish, mutton, chicken that can help the patient to return to normal condition.

vii) Protein deficiency also causes numerous problems like loss of weight, weakness, shrinkage
of muscle tissue and edema. Other syndromes include unusually low blood pressure,
unusually low heart rate, anemia and pigmentation on the skin. The metabolism rate is also
likely to decrease. It is also believed to lead to fatty infiltration and cirrhosis of the liver.
viii) Protein deficiency also results in poor healing of wounds. This increases the risk of surgery.
ix)

The protein deficiency symptoms are - Hair Loss, Lethargy and weakness, Skin rashes,
Weight loss, Trouble falling asleep, Delayed wound healing leading to protein deficiency
infections, Muscle cramps, Brittle nails, Ridges in finger and toe nails, Skin ulcers,
Headache and nausea, Edema (water retention in legs, feet, hands, etc.), Mood swings,
Depression and anxiety.

Excess Protein Intake Diseases:
A high protein intake has many disadvantages –
i) When protein is consumed in greater amounts than can be processed by the body, toxicity
results from the excessive amount of nitrogen in the blood. This extra nitrogen accumulates as
kinotoxin in the muscles and causes chronic fatigue.
ii) Proteinosis or acute protein poisoning causes headaches and a general aching. Various
symptoms of protein poisoning such as a burning of the mouth, lips and throat, rashes, etc. are
very similar to the symptoms attributed to allergies. In fact, many so-called allergies may be
cases of protein poisoning instead.
iii) Once the body needs nave been taken care of, the excess protein is deaminated by the liver
and urea is synthesized. The kidneys have to work more to excrete the additional amount of
urea. A high protein intake is an unnecessary burden on two vital organs i.e. liver and the
kidneys. If these organs are diseased, toxic wastes tend to accumulate in the body.

P a g e | 36
iv) When animal proteins such as meat, poultry and whole milk products form a substantial part
of the high-protein diet, there is a risk of high blood levels of cholesterol.
v) A high intake of protein increases the loss of calcium through the urine.
vi) Protein rich foods are much costlier, are in short supply and are not an economical source of
energy.
Biological Importance of Proteins:
Protein is the fundamental life force. Proteins are necessary in initiating every biochemical
process in the body as well as in providing us an invaluable source of energy. In the absence of
protein, the body would simply shut down.
i) Protein as Enzymes:
Proteins are responsible for almost every chemical reaction that takes place in the body. These
reactions are facilitated by enzymes, which are actually protein catalysts that increase the rate
of reaction without themselves being changed in the process.
The amount of enzymes present in the body determines the rate at which a chemical event can
occur. Thus if there is deficiency in enzymes, there will be a slower reaction.
Several thousand enzymes have been discovered to date and virtually every one is a protein.
ii) Transportation and Storage:
Proteins have a unique ability to transport substances across cell membranes that other
molecules can't penetrate. Hemoglobin is a type of protein that is responsible for carrying
oxygen in red blood cell. Myoglobin is responsible for carrying oxygen. Ferritin is a protein
that assists in the storage of iron and stores blood in the liver. Without protein for
transportation and storage, we would not have blood to nourish our bodies.
iii) Cell and Tissue Growth:
Continuous supply of amino acids needed by the body in order to build the proteins that create
tissue. Throughout our everyday lives, we constantly manufacture new tissues such as hair,
teeth, skin and nails. The blood cells and skin cells last about a month while the cells situated
in our digestive system lining last only two weeks. When the cells die and slough off, our
bodies need new healthy tissue to replace them. It is only through the regeneration of new
tissue that we can become healthy again.

iv) Mechanical Support:
Collagen, the most abundant protein found in the human body is a type of structural protein
that is fibrous in nature. Collagen is responsible for giving strength and support to tissues such
as skin and bone that undergo continual wear and tear.

P a g e | 37
Athletes that work out two or more hours a day rely on the body's ability to manufacture new
collagen, which keeps their joints healthy and strong and prevents injury.
v) Coordination and Motion:
Proteins are a major component in muscle contraction. Muscle contraction occurs when two
fibrous protein filament glide across each other. On a smaller scale, sperms are propelled in
motion by their flagella, which are made up of contractile units made of protein. Thus protein
is mainly behind the movement of sperm.
vi) Immune Protection:
Antibodies are highly specific proteins that are responsible for detecting a foreign substance or
known as "antigen". The body produces a specific antibody to respond to an antigen and
inactivate it.
vii) Nerve generation and Impulses:
The nervous system is responsible for keeping the body in balance. When a certain stimulus
triggers the nervous system, it responds with an appropriate reaction. This cannot occur
without a receptor site awaiting the stimulus. These receptor sites are made of protein
complexes and are responsible for transmitting nerve messages from cell to cell.
viii) Fluid Balance:
Proteins have the unique ability to regulate the amount of fluid within a cell. The amount of
protein within a cell will determine the cell's water content, as water is attracted to protein.
When protein levels are low, fluid imbalances result. This type of system is important to
prevent dehydration, as well as to enhance muscle and nerve cell function.
Describe the significance of milk proteins.
Milk on dry basis is a rich source of proteins (26%). Fresh milk contains only 3.5% proteins sue
to its high water content. Milk proteins are rich in all essential amino acids except S-amino acid,
in which they are limiting to a small extent.
Describe the significance of protein from legumes.
Common legumes are rich source of proteins containing 18 to 25%. Soyabean is very rich
containing from 30 to 40% proteins. Legume proteins are good sources of lysine and threonine in
which cereals are deficient but legume proteins are limiting in sulphur amino acids and
tryptophan, which are present in good amounts in cereal proteins.

Give the Biological Value (BV) of proteins.
Biological value is an index of protein quality. It is defined as the amount of absorbed nitrogen
retained in the body. The digestibility factor is not taken into account. Biological value (BV) is a

P a g e | 38
quantitative measure of the nutritive value of a protein food. A protein of high BV will retain
more nitrogen than a protein of low BV.
Cereals and pulses consumed together will have a higher BV than the average value of the
individual cereal or pulse. This is because of the complementary nature of proteins. Amino acids
deficient in cereals will be compensated by the amino acids present in pulses.
The perfect protein has a BV of 100.
Biological value of some common foods:
Food
Biological value
Food
Egg
100
Rice
Milk
85
Wheat
Fish
83
Groundnuts
Meat
75
Gelatin
What does the biological value of proteins suggests?

Biological value
73
66
55
00

In 1925 Mitchell develop the protein determining method. This method measures the amount of
dietary proteins utilized by the animal to meet the protein needs of its body.
In this method two groups of 28 day old rats are fed on two different diets. One on protein free
diet and other on 10 percent test protein. Food intake is recorded. The urine, faeces are collected
and analyzed for nitrogen. The dietary nitrogen is also estimated. From these records the
following calculations are made,
Nitrogen Digested = Nitrogen Intake (In) – Nitrogen in faeces on protein diet (Fn)
+ Nitrogen faeces on protein free diet (Fe).
i.e. Nitrogen Digested = In – (Fn – Fe)
Nitrogen lost in Metabolism = Nitrogen in urine on protein diet (Un) – Nitrogen
in urine on protein free diet (Ue).
100 x Nitrogen digested – Nitrogen lost in metabolism
Biological Value =
Nitrogen digested
In – (Fn – Fe) – (Un – Ue)
Biological Value
=
x
In – (Fn – Fe)
What is the protein efficiency ratio?

100

In 1919 Osborne, Mendel and Ferry developed this method. This method is based on growth of
young rats. A 10 % of test protein diet with all other dietary essentials is fed to the rats for four
weeks. The Gain in body weight and protein intake of rats is recorded. Then the protein efficiency
ratio is calculated using the following formula,
PER

=

Gain body weight in gm
-----------------------------Protein intake in gm

= Gain in weight/gm of protein consumed

P a g e | 39

Unit - 3
Fats and Oils; Vitamins and Minerals
FATS AND OILS:
Composition and Sources:
Fats and oils are mainly serve as the source of energy and they contain some essential nutrients
like essential fatty acids and fat soluble vitamins. Fat is essential for maintaining good health as
absence of fat leads to the development of a deficiency disease affecting the skin.
Sources:
i) Plant sources: Vegetable fats are good sources of essential fatty acids. Sunflower, safflower
sesame, soyabean and cottonseed oils are rich source of essential fatty acids. They are also good
sources of vitamin E, Vanaspati (hydrogenated vegetable oil) is a good source of vitamin A and
fair source of vitamin E and essential fatty acids.
All oils and oilseeds like groundnuts, sesame, soya bean, rice bran, coconut, almond, cashew nut,
corn, safflower, sunflower etc and all hydrogenated fats and margarine are sources of fats.
ii) Animal sources: They are poor sources of vitamin E and essential fatty acids. They also
contain cholesterol.
Mutton, pork, fish, poultry, milk and milk products such as butter, cream, cheese, eggs and organ
meat are sources of fats.
iii) Invisible sources: Invisible sources of fats are nuts, salad dressings, flesh food, desserts,
cookies, cakes, milk, eggs, milk based sweetmeats etc. which are rich in fat, but the fat is not
visible.
Nutritional value/ energy value / fuel value of Fats and Oils:
Fats and fat products serve mainly as a source of energy. They are also important sources of
essential fatty acids and vitamin A and vitamin E.
Nutritional value/ energy value / fuel value of Fats and Oils:
Name of Fat
Fats of Animal Origin :
Butter
Ghee
Animal body fats
Fats of Vegetable Origin :
Vegetable oils and fats
Red palm oil
Processed Fats :
Margarine
Shortenings
Vanaspati

Fat %

Calorific value
Kcal/100 g

Vitamin A
(ug/100g)

Vitamin E
(mg/100g)

86
100
100

774
900
900

700
600
---

2.4
2.0
1.0 - 2.0

100
100

900
900

--400 – 10000

8 – 140
10 - 15

86
100
100

774
900
900

700
--700

10 - 50
10 - 50
10 - 30

P a g e | 40
Required daily allowances of Fats and Oils:
The recommendation of the of fats by I.C.M.R. Nutrition Expert Group (1968) are,
Adults 10 %, Adolescents 15 %, Children (1-11 yrs) 15%, and Infants (0-1 year) 30% of total
calories in the food from fat.

Group
Man
Woman

Children
Boys
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys
Girls

Particulars
Adult
Adult
Pregnant
Lactation
1 – 9 years
10-12 years
13-15 years
16-18 years

Body weight (kg)
60
50
50
50
12.2 - 26.9
35.4
31.5
47.8
46.7
57.1
49.9

Fat (g/day)
20
20
30
45
25
22
22
22

Deficiency and excess intake diseases of fats and Oils:
Deficiency Diseases:
i) Deficiency of fat causes a deficiency of essential fatty acids like linoleic and linolenic acids
and subsequently a deficiency of arachidonic acid. These polysaturated fatty acids are required
for healthy cell membranes and their permeability. A deficiency results in characteristic
eczema and skin lesions. It is seen in infants as dry scaly lesions on the skin. Toad skin or dry
popules are seen in upper limbs.
ii) A deficiency of fat may result deficiency of fat soluble vitamins and growth and weight may
be affected in children.
iii) Deficiency essential fatty acid causes a nutritional deficiency of the skin, Phrynoderma.
Excess intake Diseases:
i) Excess of fat consumption amounting to over 40% of the dietary calories has been associated
with hypercholesterolemia and atherosclerosis.
ii) Excess intake of fat causes obesity because more Kcal are consumed than required by the
body. Excess fat is stored in adipose tissue.
iii) Excessive consumption of saturated fats elevates blood cholesterol levels. A high intake of
saturated fat and cholesterol are predisposing factors for cardiovascular diseases while foods
rich in omega-3 fatty acids have a protective effect.

P a g e | 41
Functions of Fats and oils:
Fats perform several important functions.
1) Energy: They are the concentrated source of energy, yielding more than twice the energy
supplied by carbohydrate per unit weight. All tissues except those of the central nervous
system and brain can utilize fat as a source of energy.
2) Protein sparing action: The kilocalories from the far spare dietary proteins from being
oxidized for energy. An adequate intake of fat in the diet allows proteins to perform their main
functions if growth and maintenance.
3) Thermal insulation: Subcutaneous fat acts as an insulation and helps in retaining body heat.
4) Protection of vital organs: Fat provides a protective padding to vital organs from mechanical
shock and keeps them in place.
5) Absorption of fat soluble vitamins: Fat is necessary fro the absorption of fat soluble
vitamins A, D, E and K.
6) Essential fatty acids: An adequate intake of fats/oils is necessary to meet the body’s
requirements for linoleic and linolenic acids.
7) Satiety value: Fats slow down the secretion of gastric juice and speed od digestion.
8) Flavour: Food is more flavoursome because of volatile essential oils naturally present and
fats used for cooking. A well cooked meal containing fats is more satisfying than a meat
devoid of fats.
9) Synthesis of cell membranes: Fats are an important constituent of all cell membranes.
10) Synthesis of hormones: The lipid cholesterol is necessary for the synthesis of some
hormones. Exa. – Sex hormones.
Anti-nutritional factors:
Anti-nutritional factors are natural or synthetic substances found in the human diet or animal feed
that have the potential to adversely affect health and growth by preventing the absorption of
nutrients from food.
Excessive intake of required nutrients can also result in them having an anti-nutrient action.
Biological effect of Antioxidants:
Antioxidants are compounds that prevent oxidation. Oxidation is the process that turns newspaper
yellow and cut apples brown. Oxidation leads to degenerative changes in our body. Exa. – It
contributes to the breakdown of body cells as we age.
Antioxidants such as vit. C, vit. E, beta-carotene and selenium help protect against free radical
damage. They scavange free radicals and protect body cells against cancer. They prevent
atherosclerosis and coronary artery diseases (CAD).

P a g e | 42
VITAMINS:
Composition and Sources:
Szent Gyogi says that, a vitamin is something that makes us sick when we do not eat it. Vitamins
are defined as, potent organic compounds, occurring in varying and minute proportions in food,
which must be available to the organism from exogenous sources, in order that physiological
processes essential to life may proceed normally.
Vitamins are natural substances found in plants and animals and known as Essential nutrients for
human beings. Dr. Funk introduced the term vitamine for these organic compounds. The vitamin
which Funk extracted contained as amine and that is found to be essential for vital activities.
Hence the name Vitamine. But later it was found that amine was not present in all the vitamins.
Hence ‘e’ was deleted and the term Vitamin was used instead of Vitamine.
Vitamins are low molecular weight organic compounds indispensable for the normal vital activity
of the organisms. Their absence causes deficiency diseases.
Vitamins either participate in the production of coenzymes, indispensable for normal functioning
or the corresponding enzymes or act as regulators or biochemical processes.
Sources of Vitamins:
Plants synthesize all vitamins, animals cannot synthesize all vitamins. But vitamins are present in
animals as a result of food intake. In humans the vitamin sources are food and intestinal bacteria.
Human body uses these substances to stay healthy and support its many functions.
The body needs vitamins to stay healthy and a varied diet usually gives you all the vitamins you
need. Vitamins do not provide energy (calories) directly, but they do help regulate energyproducing processes.
There are two types of Vitamins –
i) Fat soluble vitamins such as Vit. A, D, E and K.
ii) Water soluble vitamins such as Vit. B1, Riboflavin, Vit. B6, Niacin, Panthothenic acid, Folic
acid, Vit. C etc.

Vitamin A (retinol) properties
Eyesight, growth, appetite and taste.
Good for
Signs of deficiency Night-blindness
800 micrograms
RDA
Liver, cod liver oil, carrots, green leafy vegetables, egg yolks, enriched
Good sources
margarine, milk products and yellow fruits.
This vitamin is fat-soluble and so is stored in the body for a long time,
Poisoning
especially in pregnancy. An overdose may be dangerous.
Fatty acids
Destroyed by

P a g e | 43
Vitamin B1 (thiamine) properties
Nervous system, digestion, muscles, heart, alcohol-damaged nerve tissues.
Good for
Signs of deficiency Tingling in fingers and toes, confusion, difficulties in maintaining balance, loss
of appetite, exhaustion and weakened powers of concentration.
1.4 mg
RDA
Liver, yeast, egg yolk, cereal, red meat,nuts and wheatgerm
Good sources
No danger. It dissolves in water, so any excess is passed in urine.
Poisoning
High temperatures, alcohol and coffee
Destroyed by
Vitamin B2 (riboflavin) properties
Growth, skin, nails, hair, sensitive lips and tongue, eyesight, the breakdown of
Good for
protein, fat and carbohydrates
Signs of deficiency Itchy irritated eyes, itchy mucous membranes (nose, mouth, throat) and
cracked corners of lips.
1.6 mg
RDA
Milk, liver, yeast, cheese, green leafy vegetables, fish
Good sources
No danger. It dissolves in water, so any excess is passed in urine.
Poisoning
Alcohol and light (this is why milk-cartons are better than bottles).
Destroyed by
Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) properties
Preventing skin conditions, nerve problems, helps the body absorb protein and
Good for
carbohydrate.
Signs of deficiency Skin inflammation.
2 mg – women taking the contraceptive pill may need more.
RDA
Fish, bananas, chicken, pork, wholegrains and dried beans
Good sources
May cause nerve problems in large doses. Evidence is conflicting about the
Poisoning
maximum safe dose, so get medical advice before exceeding the RDA.
The contraceptive pill, roasted or boiled food, alcohol and oestrogen (the
Destroyed by
female hormone).
Vitamin B12 (Cobalamin) properties
Making red blood and the formation of the nerves
Good for
Signs of deficiency Tiredness and fatigue, tingling and numbness in hands/feet, memory problems
and anaemia
1 microgram
RDA
Eggs, shellfish, poultry, meat, liver, milk, cheese and fortified cereal
Good sources
No danger. It dissolves in water, so any excess is passed in urine.
Poisoning
Water, sunlight, alcohol, oestrogen and sleeping pills
Destroyed by
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) properties
Immune defence system, protection from viruses and bacteria, healing wounds,
Good for
reducing cholesterol, cell lifespan and preventing scurvy
Signs of deficiency Tiredness, bleeding gums and slow-healing wounds
60 mg
RDA
Citrus fruits, kiwi fruit, berries, tomatoes, cauliflower, potatoes, green leafy
Good sources
vegetables and peppers
Large doses can cause diarrhoea and nausea, eg 2g/day . Some scientists have
Poisoning
argued that 1000-5000mg per day may damage your DNA.
Boiling food, light, smoking and heat.
Destroyed by

P a g e | 44
Vitamin D properties
Strong bones and teeth
Good for
Signs of deficiency Unhealthy teeth, osteomalacia (causes weakening of bones), rickets in children.
5 micrograms
RDA
Sunlight (the action of sunlight on the skin allows our bodies to
Good sources
manufacture vitamin D), cod liver oil, sardines, herring, salmon, tuna, milk and
milk products.
This vitamin is fat-soluble so can accumulate in the body. Overdoses are
Poisoning
dangerous, but there is wide variability in the toxic level, eg 400IU for
children.
Mineral oil.
Destroyed by
Vitamin E (Tocopherol) properties
Fighting toxins – vitamin E is a powerful antioxidant.
Good for
Signs of deficiency Weak muscles and fertility problems
10 mg
RDA
Nuts, soya beans, vegetable oil, broccoli, sprouts, spinach, wholemeal products
Good sources
and eggs
Potential effect with warfarin increasing risk of bleeding, more than 400IU/day
Poisoning
can increase risk of heart failure and death in long term illness.
Heat, oxygen, frost, iron and chlorine
Destroyed by
Folic acid properties
Production of red blood cells. It is essential in the first three months of
Good for
pregnancy to prevent birth defects such as spina bifida, cleft palate or cleft lip.
Signs of deficiency Tiredness due to anaemia and red tongue
200 micrograms. Women planning to conceive should take a daily supplement
RDA
of 400 mcg, continued for the first 12 weeks of pregnancy
Carrots, yeast, liver, egg, yolks, melon, apricots, pumpkin, avocado, beans, rye
Good sources
and whole wheat and green leafy vegetables
No danger. It dissolves in water, so any excess is passed in urine
Poisoning
Water, sunlight and heat
Destroyed by
List of Vitamins with Chemical name, Food source, Recommended dietary allowances
(RDA), Deficiency disease and Overdose disease:

Name
Chemical name of Food Source RDA Male:
Deficiency
Overdose disease
of
Vitamin
Age 19-70)
disease
Vitamin
Fat Soluble Vitamins:
Vitamin Retinol, retinal and Cod liver oil
900 ug
Night-blindness, Hypervitaminosis A
A
four carotenoids
Hyperkeratosis,
including
beta
and
carotene
Keratomalacia
Vitamin Cholecalciferol
Cod liver oil
5 – 10 ug Rickets
and Hypervitaminosis D
D
Osteomalacia

P a g e | 45
Vitamin Tocopherols,
E
tocotrienols

Wheat germ
oil, unrefined
vegetable oils

15 mg

Vitamin Phylloquinone,
K
menaquinones

Leafy green
vegetables

120 ug

Water Soluble Vitamins:
Vitamin Ascorbic acid
C
Vitamin Thiamine
B1

Citrus, most
fresh foods
Rice bran

Vitamin Riboflavin
B2
Vitamin Niacin,
B3
niacinamide

Meat, eggs
Meat,
grains

Vitamin Pantothenic acid
B5
Vitamin Pyridoxine,
B6
pyridoxamine,
pyridoxal

Vitamin Biotin
B7
Vitamin Folic acid,
B9
folinic acid

Deficiency
is
very rare; mild
hemolytic anemia
in
newborn
infants
Bleeding
diathesis

Increased
congestive
heart
failure
seen
in
onelarge
randomized study
Increases
coagulation
in
patients
taking
warfarin

90 mg

Scurvy

1.2 mg

1.3 mg

Beriberi,
WernickeKorsakoff
syndrome
Ariboflavinosis

Vitamin C
megadosage
Drowsiness
or
muscle relaxation
with large doses

eggs,

16 mg

Pellagra

Meat, whole
grains,
in
many foods
Meat, dairy
products

5 mg

Paresthesia

1.3 to 1.7
mg

Anemia
peripheral
neuropathy

Meat, dairy
products, eggs
Leafy green
vegetables

Vitamin Cyanocobalamin,
liver,
eggs,
B12
hydroxycobalamin, animal
methylcobalamin
products

30 ug
400 ug

2.4 ug

Dermatitis,
enteritis
Megaloblast and
Deficiency
during pregnancy
is associated with
birth
defects,
such as neural
tube defects
Megaloblastic
anemia

Liver
damage
(doses > 2g/day)
and other problems
Diarrhea; possibly
nausea
and
heartburn.
Impairment
of
proprioception,
nerve
damage
(doses
>
100
mg/day)

May
symptoms
vitamin
deficiency;
effects

mask
of
B12
other

Acne-like
rash
[causality is not
conclusively
established]

P a g e | 46
Functions of Vitamins:
Vitamins promote normal growth, provide proper metabolism, ensure good health and protect
against certain diseases. Vitamin is required by the body in small amounts for metabolism, to
protect health and for proper growth in children. Vitamins assist in the formation of hormones,
blood cells, nervous-system chemicals, and genetic material. Vitamins mainly serve as catalysts
for certain reactions in the body. They combine with proteins to create metabolically active
enzymes that in turn produce hundreds of important chemical reactions throughout the body. The
fundamentals of cells depend greatly upon vitamins. Vitamins are responsible for keeping cells
strong, binding tissues, fighting infections, etc. Without vitamins our cells would not function
properly and thus our organs would suffer and eventually we would no longer be able to survive.
Vitamins help regulate metabolism, help convert fat and carbohydrates into energy, and assist in
forming bone and tissue.
i) Vitamin A plays an important role in vision, bone growth, reproduction, cell division and
differentiation.
ii) Vitamin B complex improves the body's resistance to stress. Aids in digestion, promotes good
muscle tone, healthy skin. Vitamin B complex reduces muscle spasms, leg cramps, hand
numbness and helps regulate blood pressure.
iii) Vitamin C is responsible for helping to build and maintain our tissues and strengthening our
immune system.
iv) Adequate amounts of vitamin D is necessary for preventing bone loss.
v) Vitamin E is the most effective, fat-soluble antioxidant known to occur in the human body.
The main function of vitamin E is to maintain the integrity of the body's intracellular
membrane by protecting its physical stability and providing a defense line against tissue
damage caused by oxidation. Alpha-lipoic acid helps to neutralize the effects of free radicals
on the body.
vi) Vitamin K plays an important role in blood clotting and bone metabolism (carboxylation of
osteocalcin). Bioflavonoids have antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antiallergenic, antiviral, and
anti-carcinogenic properties.
Vitamins as accessory factor of food:
In 1906, English biochemist Sir F. G. Hopkins was first called vitamin as accessory factor of
food. Because he was found that, most foods contain besides carbohydrates, proteins, fats,
minerals and water, other substances necessary for health.
Vitamin is a group of organic substances that are required in the diet of humans and animals for
normal growth, maintenance of life and normal reproduction. Vitamins act as catalysts; very often
either the vitamins themselves are coenzymes or they form integral parts of coenzymes. A

P a g e | 47
substance that functions as a vitamin for one species does not necessarily function as a vitamin for
another species. The vitamins differ in structure and there is no chemical grouping common to
them all.
Vitamins have diverse biochemical functions. Some have hormone-like functions as regulators of
mineral metabolism such as vitamin D or regulators of cell and tissue growth and differentiation
such as some forms of vitamin A. Others function as antioxidants e.g., vitamin E and
sometimes vitamin C. The large number of vitamins, such as B complex vitamins functions as
precursors for enzyme cofactors, which help enzymes in their work as catalysts in metabolism. In
this role, vitamins may be tightly bound to enzymes as part of prosthetic groups, for e.g. biotin is
part of enzymes involved in making fatty acids.
Vitamins may also be less tightly bound to enzyme catalysts as coenzymes, detachable molecules
that function to carry chemical groups or electrons between molecules, for e.g. folic acid may
carry methyl, formyl and methylene groups in the cell. Although these roles in assisting enzymesubstrate reactions are vitamins best-known function, the other vitamin functions are equally
important.
Note : The recommended amounts of these vitamins are listed in three different ways: grams,
milligrams and micrograms.
Vitamin

Examples of
Good Food
Sources

Function

Recommended
Daily Amount
(RDA) or Adequate

Vitamin A

Sweet
potato
with
peel,
carrots, spinach,
fortified cereals
Whole
grain,
enriched,
fortified
products; bread;
cereals
Milk,
bread
products,
fortified cereals

Necessary
for
normal
vision,
immune function,
reproduction
Allows the body to
process
carbohydrates and
some protein.

Men: 900 ug/day
Women: 700 ug/day

Vitamin
B1(Thiamin)

Vitamin B2
(Riboflavin)

Vitamin B3
(Niacin)

Meat,
fish,
poultry, enriched
and whole grain
breads, fortified
cereals

Key in metabolism
and the conversion
of
food
into
energy;
helps
produce red blood
cells
Assists
in
digestion and the
conversion of food
into
energy;
important in the

Men: 1.2 mg/day
Women: 1.1 mg/day
Pregnant
and
breastfeeding
women: 1.4 mg/day
Men: 1.3 mg/day
Women: 1.1 mg/day
Pregnant Women:
1.4 mg/day
Breastfeeding
Women: 1.6 mg/day
Men: 16 mg/day
Women: 14 mg/day
Pregnant
Women: 18 mg/day
Breastfeeding

Upper Limit (The
Highest Amount
You Can Take
Without Risk
3,000 ug/day

Unknown

Unknown

For niacin in natural
sources, there is no
upper limit.
For
niacin
in
supplements
or

P a g e | 48
production
of women: 17 mg/day
cholesterol
Chicken, beef, Important in fatty Adults: 5 mg/day
Vitamin B5
oats, acid metabolism
Pregnant women: 6
(Pantothenic potatoes,
cereals, tomatoes
mg/day
Acid)
Breastfeeding
women: 7 mg/day
Fortified cereals, Important for the Men age 19-50:1.3
Vitamin B6
fortified
soy nervous system; mg/day
products, organ helps the body Men age 51 up: 1.7
meats
metabolize
mg/day
proteins and sugar Women age 19 50: 1.3 mg/day
Women age 51
up: 1.5 mg/day
Pregnant
women: 1.9 mg/day
Breastfeeding
women: 2 mg/day
Liver,
fruits, Helps with the Adults: 30 ug/day
Vitamin
meats
synthesis of fats, Breastfeeding
B7(Biotin)
glycogen
and women: 35 ug/day
amino acids
poultry, Important in the Adults: 2.4 ug/day
Vitamin B12 Fish,
fortified production of red Pregnant
(Cobalamin) meat,
cereals
blood cells
women: 2.6 ug/day
Breastfeeding
women: 2.8 ug/day
Red and green Antioxidant that Men: 90 mg/day
Vitamin C
peppers, kiwis, protects
against Women: 75 mg/day
oranges,
cell
damage, Pregnant
strawberries,
boosts the immune women: 85 mg/day
broccoli
system,
forms Breastfeeding
collagen in the women: 120 mg/day
body
in Adults age 18-50:
Vitamin D Fish liver oils, Crucial
fatty
fish, metabolizing
5 ug/day
(Calciferol)
fortified
milk calcium
for Adults age 51products,
healthy bones
70: 10 ug/day
fortified cereals;
Adults over age
also,
formed
70: 15 ug/day
naturally as a
Pregnant
and
result of sunlight
breastfeeding
exposure
women: 5 ug/day
Vitamin E Fortified cereals, Antioxidant that Adults (including
sunflower seeds, protects
cells pregnant
(alpha-

fortified foods: 35
mg/day
Unknown

100 mg/day

Unknown

Unknown

2,000 mg/day

50 ug/day

1,000 mg/day

P a g e | 49
tocopherol)

Vitamin K

almonds, peanut
butter, vegetable
oils
Green vegetables
like
spinach,
collards,
and
broccoli;
brussels sprouts;
cabbage

against damage

women): 15 mg/day
Breastfeeding
women: 19 mg/day
Important in blood Men: 120 ug/day
Unknown
clotting and bone Women (including
health
pregnant
and
breastfeeding):
90 ug/day

MINERALS:
Composition and Sources:
The body contains about 24 minerals all of which are derived from the diet. The important
minerals are calcium, phosphorous, potassium, sodium, chloride, magnesium, iron, copper, iodine,
fluorine and zinc.
The body needs many minerals; these are called essential minerals. Essential minerals are divided
into major minerals (macrominerals) and trace minerals (microminerals). These two groups of
minerals are equally important, but trace minerals are needed in smaller amounts than major
minerals.
Macrominerals or Major minerals: These are Sodium, Chloride, Potassium, Calcium,
Phosphorus, Magnesium and Sulfur
Microminerals or Trace minerals: These are Iron, Zinc, Iodine, Selenium, Copper, Manganese,
Fluoride, Chromium and Molybdenum. Other trace nutrients known to be essential in tiny
amounts include nickel, silicon, vanadium, and cobalt.
Sources, Nutritional value / energy value / fuel Value, Required daily allowances, Deficiency
and excess intake disease and Functions of Minerals:
1) Calcium:
Calcium is essential for bone growth and strength, as well as muscle, heart and digestive system
health. Sources of the mineral include dairy products, green leafy vegetables and sardines eaten
with bones, nuts and seeds.
Sources: Dairy products such as milk, yoghurt and cheese, kelp, broccoli, almonds, sardines eaten
with the bones and sesame seeds.
RDA: The recommended daily amount (RDA) is 1000 mg.
Function: Calcium is a macromineral that is needed to maintain strong and healthy bones and
teeth. It is also involved in normal blood clotting, muscle and nerve function, lowering blood
pressure and is thought to prevent colon cancer.
Symptoms of deficiency: Muscle weakness, spasms and cramp, softening of the bones, which
could lead to osteoporosis, back pain, brittle bones and fractures.

P a g e | 50
2) Chloride:
Chloride is a necessary mineral for digestive health. It helps in the production of hydrocholoric
acid in the stomach and cellular pump functions. It can be found in table salt.
Sources: Table salt and foods that contain sodium chloride.
Function: Required for the formation of acids in the stomach as well as regulating fluid in all
blood vessels and cells.
RDA: The RDA is 2300 mg.
Symptoms of deficiency: A deficiency is very uncommon but may cause excessive amounts of
potassium to be lost and low blood pressure.
3) Magnesium:
Magnesium is necessary for processing enzymes important for metabolism, especially in bones,
muscles, and soft tissue. Foods with magnesium include nuts, soy beans, and cocoa.
Sources: Whole grains, green leafy vegetables, shellfish, nuts and bananas.
RDA: The RDA is 420 mg.
Function: A very important macromineral that is contained in our bones. It is needed to convert
blood sugar into energy, control muscle and nerve function, maintain a normal heart rhythm and
blood clotting. Research has proved that magnesium protects and treats heart disease, lowers high
blood pressure, can ease asthma attacks and PMS in women.
Symptoms of deficiency: The risk of heart disease and diabetes is increased and can also cause
heartbeat irregularities, confusion, muscle cramps and kidney stones.
4) Phosphorous:
Phosphorous is required for bone health, energy processing, and many other functions in the body.
Foods rich in phosphorous are meat, poultry, fish, eggs, and dairy products.
Sources: meat, poultry, fish, milk, cheese, nuts, seeds and whole grains.
RDA: The RDA for phosphorous is 700 mg.
Function: Phosphorous is another important mineral involved in the formation and maintenance
of strong and healthy bones and teeth. It also helps to supply energy to every cell in the body and
is needed to absorb a number of vitamins.
Symptoms of deficiency: A deficiency in phosphorous is fairly rare, however, symptoms would
include weak and painful bones and teeth, stiff joints, tiredness and a loss of calcium from the
body.
5) Potassium:
Potassium is needed for regulating how the body processes energy and maintains metabolism, as
well as contributing to nerve function. Foods high in potassium include legumes, potato skins,
tomatoes, and bananas.

P a g e | 51
Sources: Fresh fruit and vegetables, particularly avocados, bananas, oranges, potatoes. Also dried
fruit, nuts, seeds, meat, poultry and milk.
RDA: The RDA for potassium is 4700 mg.
Function: Potassium, along with sodium, works to regulate fluid in the body. Potassium also
helps to maintain a regular heartbeat and low blood pressure and enables glucose in the body to be
converted to glycogen, a storable form of energy.
Symptoms of deficiency: Muscle weakness, nausea, confusion and feelings of being really
thirsty.
6) Sodium:
Sodium is necessary for regulating body fluid, nerve function, and heart health. Foods with
sodium are table salt, sea vegetables, milk, and spinach.
Sources: Salt, shellfish, anchovies, dairy products especially butter, yeast extracts, processed
meats, avocados and offal.
RDA: The RDA for sodium is 1500 mg.
Function: Helps to maintain muscles and nerves in good working order and works together with
potassium, regulating the fluids in the body.
Symptoms of deficiency: A deficiency is very rare but is possible through sweating, diarrhoea or
vomiting and symptoms include sickness and dizziness, muscle cramps and dehydration.
7) Chromium:
Sources: Shellfish, red meat, liver, egg yolks, cheese, molasses, brewer's yeast, mushrooms and
whole wheat bread.
RDA: The RDA is 35 – 40 ug/day
Function: Chromium is a trace element that is important in the body. It is able to stabilise blood
sugar levels, which could prevent diabetes, by using insulin efficiently. It also aids the break
down of fats in the body and is said to increase the good cholesterol in the body while lowering
the bad cholesterol.
Symptoms of deficiency: A lack of chromium could bring on the onset of diabetes as well as
raise blood cholesterol levels and could lead to heart disease.
8) Copper:
Copper is necessary for the metabolism of iron. Foods that contain this mineral are seafood, nuts,
seeds, wheat bran cereals, and whole grains.
Sources: Offal, oysters and shellfish, whole grains, nuts, seeds, avocados, potatoes, garlic,
bananas, mushrooms, cocoa, tomatoes, prunes and soya products.
RDA: The RDA is 900 mg.

P a g e | 52
Function: Copper helps to form collagen, which is essential for healthy bones and connective
tissue. It is important for the production of red blood cells and is needed to absorb iron more
easily. Research suggests that copper may prevent heart disease and high blood pressure and that
it protects against damage from free radicals and the development of cancer.
Symptoms of deficiency: Weakness, skin and breathing problems, although a deficiency is not
common.
9) Fluoride:
Sources: Toothpaste, tap water and tea.
RDA: The RDA is 3 - 4 mg/day.
Function: Fluoride is important for healthy bones and teeth and protects teeth against tooth
decay.
Symptoms of deficiency: A lack of fluoride will cause tooth decay.
10) Iodine:
Iodine is required for maintaining the production of thyroid hormones, regulating metabolism, and
may also work as an antioxidant. Foods that have iodine are iodized salt, seafood, or some
processed foods with iodized salt.
Sources: Table salt, seafood, saltwater fish and seaweed.
RDA: The RDA for iodine is 150 mg.
Function: Iodine plays a major part in the manufacture of certain hormones by the thyroid gland,
that are responsible for regulating metabolism, converting fats into energy and stabilizing blood
cholesterol levels.
Symptoms of deficiency: This is extremely rare but a deficiency would lead to an enlarged
thyroid gland, dry skin and tiredness.
11) Iron:
Iron is essential for the production of hemoglobin, the protein which transports oxygen in red
blood cells. The mineral is necessary to prevent anemia. Foods with iron include red meat, leafy
green vegetables, fish such as tuna or salmon, eggs, dried fruits, beans, whole grains, and enriched
grains.
Sources: Liver, lamb, beef, oysters, shellfish, clams, mussels, beans, peas, yeast, dried fruits,
fortified breakfast cereals, molasses, wheat bran and green leafy vegetables.
RDA: The FDA for iron is 8 mg.
Function: Iron is required for the production of haemoglobin, the component of red blood cells
that transports oxygen around the body. It is also needed to produce myoglobin, which carries
oxygen to our muscles. Iron can prevent fatigue, protect against illness and disease and promotes
a healthy looking skin.

P a g e | 53
Symptoms of deficiency: It is not uncommon for people to have an iron deficiency in their diet.
This could be the case particularly for women with heavy periods, vegetarians and athletes.
Symptoms of a lack of iron include tiredness and fatigue, poor concentration, prone to infection,
shortness of breath, anaemia, brittle hair and heart palpitations.
12) Manganese:
Manganese is essential for enzyme functions that maintain metabolism and proper digestion. It
can also protect the body against free radicals. Foods containing the mineral are whole grains,
nuts, and green vegetables.
Sources: Nuts, brown rice, cereals, whole grains and pulses.
RDA: The RDA for manganese is 2.3 mg.
Function: Manganese is important for the protection of the body's cells particularly against
damage from free radicals. It is required for the process of metabolism and digestion and helps to
break down fats and cholesterol. Manganese is also vital for the formation of healthy bones and
tissues.
Symptoms of deficiency: A lack of manganese can lead to digestive problems, dizziness and loss
of hearing.
13) Molybdenum:
Molybdenum is necessary for producing DNA and works as an antioxidant by helping in the
prevention of allergic reactions. Foods rich in molybdenum include liver, whole grains, yeast, and
leafy green vegetables.
Sources: Liver, whole grains, yeast, pulses, leafy green vegetables.
RDA: The RDA is 45 mg.
Function: Necessary for the production of DNA and is also known as an antioxidant. It helps to
break down sulfites in foods, where if a toxic build-up occurs, it could lead to an allergic reaction.
It is also known to prevent tooth decay.
Symptoms of deficiency: A deficiency could lead to breathing difficulties and other allergic
reactions.
14) Selenium:
Selenium is essential for the function of antioxidant enzymes that combat free radicals. It is
important for fighting against diseases such as cancer and heart disease. Foods with selenium
include seafood, eggs, dairy products, citrus fruits, nuts, avocados, and lentils.
Sources: Seafood, eggs, offal, dairy products, citrus fruits, brazil nuts, avocados and lentils.
RDA: The RDA for selenium is 55 mg.
Function: Selenium is an important antioxidant, as it is known to block free radicals in the body.
It fights cancer, heart disease and prevents cataracts from forming. It may delay the development

P a g e | 54
of AIDS and reduces the severity of common infections and illnesses.
Symptoms of deficiency: A lack of selenium in the diet could lead to a higher risk of cancer,
heart disease and skin problems.
15) Sulphur:
Sources: Animal and vegetable proteins such as meat, poultry, beans and pulses and shellfish.
Function: Sulphur is an important component of several amino acids, which are needed to form
proteins in the body. It is also very good at detoxifying and eliminating any toxins from the body.
Sulphur may delay the ageing process and the onset of any age-related diseases.
16) Zinc:
Zinc is required for maintaining the immune system, reproductive health, and normal growth.
Foods with zinc include seafood, red meat, poultry, fish, and eggs.
Sources: Oysters, red meat, poultry, eggs, shellfish, cheese, nuts, sunflower seeds, beans and
wheat germ.
RDA: The RDA for zinc is 11 mg.
Function : Zinc is present in every cell in the body and also in hair, nails and skin. It is needed to
maintain a healthy immune system, which can help in keeping colds and flu at bay. Zinc is
necessary for a healthy reproduction system, normal growth and can also be taken to treat a
number of problems such as fatigue, skin problems and sore throat.
Symptoms of deficiency: A lack of zinc in the diet is quite uncommon, however, symptoms
include more cold and flu bouts, longer healing of wounds, a lesser sense of taste and smell, skin
problems, loss of appetite and night blindness.
Macrominerals or Major minerals:
Mineral

Sources

Function

Sodium

Table salt, soy sauce; large amounts in
processed foods; small amounts in milk,
breads, vegetables, and unprocessed meats

Needed for proper fluid balance,
nerve transmission, and muscle
contraction

Chloride

Table salt, soy sauce; large amounts in
processed foods; small amounts in milk,
meats, breads, and vegetables

Needed for proper fluid balance,
stomach acid

Potassium

Meats, milk, fresh fruits and vegetables,
whole grains, legumes

Needed for proper fluid balance,
nerve transmission, and muscle
contraction

Calcium

Milk and milk products; canned fish with
bones (salmon, sardines); fortified tofu and
fortified soy milk; greens (broccoli, mustard
greens); legumes

Important for healthy bones and teeth;
helps muscles relax and contract;
important in nerve functioning, blood
clotting, blood pressure regulation,

P a g e | 55
immune system health
Phosphorus Meat, fish, poultry, eggs, milk, processed
foods (including soda pop)

Important for healthy bones and teeth;
found in every cell; part of the system
that maintains acid-base balance

Magnesium Nuts and seeds; legumes; leafy, green
vegetables; seafood; chocolate; artichokes;
"hard" drinking water

Found in bones; needed for making
protein, muscle contraction, nerve
transmission, immune system health

Sulfur

Found in protein molecules

Occurs in foods as part of protein: meats,
poultry, fish, eggs, milk, legumes, nuts

Microminerals or Trace minerals:
Mineral

Sources

Function

Iron

Organ meats; red meats; fish; poultry;
shellfish (especially clams); egg yolks;
legumes; dried fruits; dark, leafy
greens; iron-enriched breads and
cereals; and fortified cereals

Part of a molecule (hemoglobin) found
in red blood cells that carries oxygen
in the body; needed for energy
metabolism

Zinc

Meats, fish, poultry, leavened whole Part of many enzymes; needed for
grains, vegetables
making protein and genetic material;
has a function in taste perception,
wound
healing,
normal
fetal
development, production of sperm,
normal growth and sexual maturation,
immune system health

Iodine

Seafood, foods grown in iodine-rich Found in thyroid hormone, which
soil, iodized salt, bread, dairy products helps regulate growth, development,
and metabolism

Selenium

Meats, seafood, grains

Copper

Legumes, nuts and seeds, whole grains, Part of many enzymes; needed for iron
organ meats, drinking water
metabolism

Manganese

Widespread in foods, especially plant Part of many enzymes
foods

Fluoride

Drinking water (either fluoridated or Involved in formation of bones and
naturally containing fluoride), fish, and teeth; helps prevent tooth decay
most teas

Chromium

Unrefined foods, especially liver, Works closely with insulin to regulate
brewer's yeast, whole grains, nuts, blood sugar (glucose) levels
cheeses

Antioxidant

Molybdenum Legumes; breads and grains; leafy Part of some enzymes

P a g e | 56
greens; leafy, green vegetables; milk;
liver
Other trace nutrients known to be essential in tiny amounts include nickel, silicon, vanadium, and
cobalt.
Note : The recommended amounts of these minerals are listed in three different ways: grams,
milligrams and micrograms.
Mineral

Calcium

Choline
(Vitamin
complex)

Examples of
Good Food
Sources

Function

Milk,
yogurt,
hard
cheeses,
fortified cereals,
spinach

Essential for bone
growth and strength,
blood
clotting,
muscle contraction,
and the transmission
of nerve signals
Milk,
liver, Plays a key role in
the production of
B eggs, peanuts
cells
and
neurotransmitters

Chromium

Meats, poultry, Helps control blood
fish,
some sugar levels
cereals

Copper

Seafood, nuts, Important in the
seeds,
wheat metabolism of iron
bran
cereals,
whole grains

Fiber

Bran
peas,
black
fruits,

cereal, Helps with digestion
lentils, and the maintenance
beans, of blood sugar levels;
reduces
the
risk

Recommended Daily
Amount (RDA) or
Adequate

Upper Limit
(The Highest
Amount You
Can Take
Without Risk
19- 2,500 mg/day

Adults
age
50: 1,000 mg/day
Adults age 51 and
up: 1,200 mg/day

Men: 550 mg/day
Women: 425 mg/day
Pregnant
women: 450 mg/day
Breastfeeding
women: 550 mg/day
Adult men age 1950: 35 ug/day
Adult men age 51
and up: 30 ug/day
Adult women age 1950: 25 ug/day
Adult women age 51
and up:20 ug/day
Pregnant women: 30
ug/day
Breastfeeding
women: 45 ug/day
Adults: 900 ug/day
Pregnant
women: 1,000 ug/day
Breastfeeding
women: 1,300 ug/day
Adult men age 1950: 38 gms/day
Adult men age 51
and up: 30 gms/day
Adult women age 19-

3,500 mg/day

Unknown

10,000 ug/day

None

P a g e | 57
vegetables

Fluoridated
water, some sea
fish, some tooth
pastes
and
mouth rinses
leafy
Folic
Acid Dark,
vegetables;
(Folate)
enriched
and
whole
grain
breads; fortified
cereals
Fluoride

Iodine

Iron

Magnesium

of heart disease

50: 25 gms/day
Adult women age 51
and up:21 gms/day
Pregnant women: 28
gms/day
Breastfeeding
women: 29 gms/day
Adult men: 4 mg/day 10 mg/day
Adult
women
(including pregnant
and breast feeding):3
mg/day
Adults: 400 ug/day
1,000 ug/day
Pregnant
women: 600 ug/day
Breastfeeding
women: 500 ug/day

Prevents
the
formation of tooth
cavities and
stimulates the growth
of bone
Key
for
the
development of cells,
protein metabolism
and heart health; in
pregnant
women,
helps prevent birth
defects
Processed foods Important in the Adults: 150 ug/day
and iodized salt production
of Pregnant women: 220
thyroid hormones
ug/day Breastfeeding
women: 290 ug/day
Fortified
Key component of Men: 8 mg/day
cereals, beans, red blood cells and Women
age
19lentils,
beef, many enzymes
50: 18 mg/day
eggs
Women age 51 and
up: 8 mg/day
Pregnant women: 27
mg/day Breastfeeding
women: 9 mg/day
Green
leafy Helps with heart Adult men age 19vegetables,
rhythm, muscle and 30: 400 mg/day
Brazil
nuts, nerve function, bone Adult men age 31
almonds,
strength
and up: 420 mg/day
soybeans,
Adult women age 19halibut, quinoa
30: 310 mg/day Adult
women age 31 and
up: 320 mg/day
Pregnant
women: 350-360
mg/day
Breastfeeding
women: 310-320
mg/day

1,100 ug/day

45 mg/day

For
magnesium in
food
and
water, there is
no
upper
limit.
For
magnesium
in supplement
s or fortified
foods:
350
mg/day

P a g e | 58
Manganese

Nuts, beans and Important in forming
other legumes, bones and some
tea,
whole enzymes
grains

Molybdenum

Legumes,
grains, nuts

Key in the production
of some enzymes

Phosphorus

Milk and other
dairy products,
peas,
meat,
eggs,
some
cereals
and
breads

Allows
cells
to
function
normally;
helps
the
body
produce energy; key
in bone growth

Potassium

Sweet potato,
bananas, yogurt,
yellow fin tuna,
soybeans

Selenium

Sodium

Zinc

Men: 2.3 mg/day
Adult women: 1.8
mg/day
Pregnant women: 2.0
mg/day
Breastfeeding
women:2.6 mg/day
Adults: 45 ug/day
Pregnant
and
breastfeeding
women: 50 ug/day
Adults: 700 mg/day
Adults up to age
70: 4,000 mg/day
Adults
over age
70: 3,000 mg/day
Pregnant
women: 3500 mg/day
Breastfeeding
women: 4,000 mg/day
Adults: 4,700 mg/day
Breastfeeding
women: 5,100 mg/day

Important
in
maintaining normal
fluid balance; helps
control blood
pressure; reduces risk
of kidney stones
Organ
meats, Protects cells from Adults: 55 ug/day
seafood, some damage;
regulates Pregnant women: 60
plants (if grown thyroid hormone
ug/day
in soil with
Breastfeeding
selenium)
women: 70 ug/day
Brazil nuts.
Foods to which Important for fluid Adults
age
19sodium chloride balance
50: 1500 mg/day
(salt) has been
Adults
age
51added,
like
70: 1,300 mg/day
salted
meats,
Adults age 71 and
nuts, butter and
up: 1,200 mg/day
vast number of
processed foods
Red
meats, Supports the body's Men: 11 mg/day
some seafood, immunity and nerve Women: 8 mg/day
fortified cereals function; important in Pregnant women: 11
reproduction
mg/day
Breastfeeding
women: 12 mg/day

11 mg/day

2,000 ug/day

Unknown

Unknown

400 mg/day

2,300 mg/day

40 mg/day

P a g e | 59

Unit – 4
Meal Planning of Various Age Group:
There is no one specific diet which fits for all the people, even if they belong to the same age
group. Nutritional needs and requirements of different people vary largely even if a person is from
a same age group. All diet plans are personalized and they depend the age, sex, likes and dislikes,
tolerance, medical history, activity pattern and lifestyle of a person. Also certain nutritional
deficiencies and medical conditions may require administration of a special diet with some
restrictions or special considerations.
Meal plans for different sexes and age groups are,
Diet for Kids and Weaning Diet for Toddlers:
Starting from a toddler, a child after age one should be slowly weaned to solid foods that the other
members of a family consume, obviously in different forms and amounts.
This transition should be gradually done between 12-24 months. A child when exposed to a
variety of foods from each food groups will consume enough amounts of energy and other
nutrients. Preschool age that is between 3-5 years is the time to inculcate good eating habits in
your child. In this phase the growth is slow so the appetite may also be low, but good eating habits
and lifestyle taught in this period can stay in the future. As your child grows older good
nutritional and energy needs continue. However in this age the chances of getting finicky and
notorious eating habits are high. To avoid such eating pattern, a child should be encouraged to sit
with the family members to take all their major meals; this will help in the behavioral
development and also in the re-enforcement of family values.
Toddler:
Children of the age of around one to around five years old are called as Toddler. After weaning,
here's a plan for your child who's experimenting with different foods, ensuring he/she has optimal
nutrition
Children from about one year old will have been weaned onto solid foods and can effectively eat
the same foods as an adult, though obviously in different amounts. This stage in life is vital to
good development both physically and mentally, therefore optimum nutrition is vital, not only for
the child's health, but also reduction in risk of disease later in life. These few years are also times
where the child experiments with a whole range of different foods and meals, and can shape
eating patterns for their whole life. Try to steer your child away from processed foods and
confectionary, and choose more traditional 'healthy' alternatives, though don't let them feel too left
out from the other kids in the playgroup, and occasional treats are fine.
The following meal plan has been designed for a 'typical' toddler from the age of around one to
around five years old. It's been compiled to be nutritionally balanced to suit a child who's active

P a g e | 60
and accounts for different likes and dislikes. Try to get your child to try different food choices, but
remember if they really do not like a particular food, they need not have it; just praise them for
trying it. Obviously all kids are different, so like all plans, it is merely an example and needs to be
adapted to suit different circumstances.
Use this to give you an idea of what healthy nutritious foods are good to include, but don't forget
get your child to drink plenty of fluid through the day. Try also to make foods fun and easy to eat;
kids do often enjoy fruit, but won't eat it unless it's chopped up in a bowl for them to nibble on.
Breakfast

High fibre cereal (like Weetabix, Shreddies or porridge – (but avoid sugar
coated cereal) + full cream milk (preferably no additional sugar although a very
light sprinkling would be acceptable) 200ml fresh fruit juice
Mid1-2 whole wheat biscuits (e.g. oatcakes, digestive) Item fruit chopped up in a
morning
bowl
200ml full cream milk
Lunch
Sandwich: 2 slices wholemeal + butter + thin slice chicken/ham or tuna in low
fat natural yoghurt.
Chopped carrot and cucumber in a bowl Yoghurt.
Drink water or diluted high-juice cordial
Mid1-2 whole wheat biscuits (e.g. oatcakes, digestive).
afternoon
Item fruit chopped up in a bowl200ml full cream milk
Evening
Typical family meal e.g.: 40-50g chicken breast / lean meat / white fish /2 tbsp
Meal
cooked basmati rice or 40g cooked pasta or small potato mashed/boiled/jacket
Tbsp cooked veg.
Drink water or diluted high-juice cordial
Evening
Drink water or diluted high-juice cordial or milk
The plan is based around encouraging the child to eat similar foods to the rest of the family. Try
to get him/her to eat the same evening meal as you, even if it's at a different time, although sitting
down together as a family is also important to behaviour development. Encourage your toddler to
eat at similar times of the day, to steer them away from snacking and binging, however encourage
them to drink whenever they're thirsty.
Children:
As your child gets older he/she will develop his/her own food habits; this plan is aimed at children
from around 5 to 11-12 years old.
Following on from a toddler's diet, children from around age three or four through until
adolescence are still developing both physically and mentally and the need for good nutrition
continues. However this age is notorious for finicky diet habits, irregular eating and grazing; all
behaviours which parents need to try to tempt their children out of. Kids are very active during
these years and as they grow, nutritional requirements will increase and optimum nutrition is vital,
not only for the child's health, but also for reduction in risk of disease later in life. During these
years eating habits for life are still being shaped. Try to steer your child away from processed

P a g e | 61
foods and confectionary, and choose more traditional 'healthy' alternatives, though don't let them
feel too left out from the other kids at school, and occasional treats are fine.
The following example meal plan has been designed for 'typical' children from the age of around
five years old to around eleven or twelve, though obviously nutritional requirements and portion
sizes of meals will vary considerably between younger and older children in this age bracket. The
plan below has been compiled to be nutritionally balanced to suit children who are active and
accounts for different likes and dislikes. Preparing different foods for your child is very important,
but remember if they really do not like a particular food, they need not have it. Obviously all kids
are different, so like all the plans here, it is merely an example and needs to be adapted to suit
different ages, sexes, activities and general circumstances. If your child is really into sports or
other physical activities then they will needs lots of energy-packed foods throughout the day.
Use this plan to give you an idea of which healthy nutritious foods are good to include in your
kid's diet, but don't forget to encourage him / her to drink plenty of fluids through the day.
Remember that calcium foods, sources of essential fats; high protein foods and slow released carb
sources need particular attention.
Breakfast

High fibre cereal (like Weetabix, Shreddies or porridge – avoid sugar
coated cereal) + skimmed milk (preferably no additional sugar although a
very light sprinkling would be acceptable) 1-2 slices granary bread
(toasted) + olive oil based spread + jam / peanut butter 200ml fresh fruit
juice
Mid-morning
1-2 whole wheat biscuits (e.g. oatcakes, digestive)
Item fruit Drink
Lunch
Sandwich: 2 slices whole meal + butter + chicken/ham or tuna in low fat
natural yoghurt or cheese.
Chopped carrot / cucumber / celery in a bowl Yoghurt
1 square home-made easy flapjack
Drink water or diluted high-juice cordial
Mid-afternoon Item fruit
Drink
Home
from High fibre cereal (like Weetabix, Shreddies or porridge – avoid sugar
school
coated cereal) + skimmed milk or 2 slices granary bread (toasted) + olive
oil based spread + jam / peanut butter Drink
Evening Meal
Typical family meal e.g.: 100-120g chicken breast / lean meat / white fish
3-4 tbsp cooked basmati rice or 60g cooked pasta or small potato
mashed/boiled/jacket.
Cooked veg
Drink
Evening
1 square home-made easy flapjack
Item fruit
Drink

P a g e | 62
The 'Home from school' snack will depend on what time your child finishes school and whether or
not he / she partakes in any after-school activities. Children should be encouraged to eat the same
evening meal as the whole family, and sitting down together is also important to help behavioural
development and for the re-enforcement of family values. Encourage your child to eat at similar
times of the day, to steer them away from snacking and binging, however encourage them to drink
whenever they're thirsty.
Foods for Adolescents and Elders:
In adolescent years special considerations should be made that is the protein requirements are
high, calcium requirement increases especially for girls, sources of essential fats and slow
released carbohydrates should also be focused. The requirement for an adult male and female will
again vary according to their job profile and needs and in general men will have higher
requirements than women.
Adolescent:
This plan is aimed at parents responsible for adolescent kids, or the teenagers themselves looking
to have a healthy, nutritious and convenient food intake
As your child grows up, they'll move on from following a child's diet, as they are now at an age
when more and more food choice is down to them. This plan is therefore aimed both at parents of
teenagers who have a responsibility to ensure their adolescent eats a good food, and at teenagers
themselves – you may well be searching on the internet for good, healthy meal plans including
food choices you like.
Adolescence is characterized from the age of 12 /13 to about 17/18, and in the latter years, the
individual can really follow a suitable adult diet according to their needs (see other plans on this
site).
However the problem with adolescence is that although children are becoming less finicky, there
is increasing emphasis to fend for yourself. Now you're older your parents may work late or leave
you home alone for a few days; or you may be out more with friends so need to grab something to
eat. The one thing I do urge teenagers to avoid, is junk take-away foods too often; these must
really only be very occasional treats.
The following example meal plan has been designed for 'typical' adolescents. Portion sizes may
need to be varied between sexes, as boys generally require more than girls, and if you're into
sports or heavy physical activities, then you'll need to eat more. The plan below has been
compiled to be nutritionally balanced to suit teenagers who are active and accounts for different
likes and dislikes.
Use this plan to give you an idea of which healthy nutritious foods are good to include in your
diet, but remember to drink plenty of fluids through the day. A good calcium intake is especially

P a g e | 63
important in teenage girls through to the age of about 30 years. Also remember to include sources
of essential fats; high protein foods and slow released carb sources.
Breakfast

High fibre cereal (like 2-3 Weetabix, Shreddies or porridge – avoid sugar
coated cereal) + skimmed milk (preferably no additional sugar although a very
light sprinkling would be acceptable)
2-3 slices granary bread (toasted) + olive oil based spread + jam / peanut butter
200ml fresh fruit juice
Mid-morning 1-2 whole wheat biscuits (e.g. oatcakes, digestive) or flapjack commercial /
home-made easy flapjack
Item fruit
Drink
Lunch
Sandwich: 2-4 slices whole meal / granary bread + olive oil based spread +
chicken/ham or tuna in low fat natural yoghurt or cheese
Chopped carrot / cucumber / celery in a bowl Yoghurt
1 square home-made easy easy flapjack
Drink water
Mid1-2 whole wheat biscuits (e.g. oatcakes, digestive) or flapjack commercial /
afternoon
home-made easy flapjack
Item fruit
Drink
Evening
Typical family meal e.g.: 120-150g chicken breast / lean meat / white fish 5-6
Meal
tbsp cooked basmati rice or 600g cooked pasta or potatoes mashed / boiled /
jacket
Cooked veg
Drink
Evening
High fibre cereal (like Weetabix, Shreddies or porridge – avoid sugar coated
snack
cereal) + skimmed milk or 2 slices granary bread (toasted) + olive oil based
spread + jam / peanut butter
Drink
Bedtime
Drink
Remember this plan is merely a guide to give you and your teenager an idea of good food choices.
Try to eat at similar times of the day, and avoid snacking and binging, but do drink water
whenever you're thirsty.
Male Adult:
A hypothetical diet plan for a 'typical' male
The following example meal plan has been designed for an 'average' male. It's nutritionally
balanced to suit a young adult male who has a sedentary job and weighs 70-75kg, and he should
maintain his weight on this. Obviously this is a hypothetical male, so like all plans, it is merely an
example and needs to be adapted to suit an individual's own lifestyle, daily routine and nutritional
requirements. Use this to give you an idea of what are healthy nutritious foods to include, but
don't forget to vary your food choices and to drink plenty of water through the day.

P a g e | 64
Breakfast

High fibre cereal (like Weetabix, bran flakes, Shreddies, muesli, porridge, etc) +
200ml skimmed milk + 1 tsp sugar 200ml fruit juice
Mug tea/coffee
2 oatcakes
Item fruit
Drink
Sandwich: 2 slices granary bread + olive oil-based spread + slice chicken/ham
or tuna in low fat natural yoghurt or smoked salmon
Mixed salad
Low fat / low sugar yoghurt
Drink
2 oatcakes
Item fruit
Drink
180g chicken breast or 200g white fish or 180g lean meat and 3-4 tblsp basmati
rice or 2 cupfuls cooked pasta or 1 medium potato and loads of veg or large
salad
Drink
2-3 oatcakes + low fat soft cheese

Midmorning
Lunch

Midafternoon
Evening
Meal
Evening
Female Adult:

A hypothetical diet plan for a 'typical' female
The following example meal plan has been designed for an 'average' female. It's nutritionally
balanced to suit a young adult female who has a sedentary job and weighs 60-65kg, and she
should maintain her weight on this. Obviously this is a hypothetical female, so like all plans, it is
merely an example and needs to be adapted to suit an individual's own lifestyle, daily routine and
nutritional requirements. Use this to give you an idea of what are healthy nutritious foods to
include, but don't forget to vary your food choices and to drink plenty of water through the day.
Breakfast

Midmorning
Lunch

Midafternoon
Evening
Meal

High fibre cereal (like Weetabix, bran flakes, Shreddies, muesli, porridge, etc) +
200 ml skimmed milk + 1 tsp sugar
200 ml fruit juice
Mug tea/coffee
Item fruit
Drink
Sandwich: 2 slices granary bread + olive oil-based spread + slice chicken/ham or
tuna in low fat natural yoghurt or smoked salmon
Mixed salad or salad with tuna/salmon /chicken/ham + crisp bread
Low fat / low sugar yoghurt
Drink
Small flapjack or cereal bar
Item fruit
Drink
120g chicken breast or 140g white fish or 120g lean meat and 2-3 tblsp basmati
rice or 2 cupfuls cooked pasta or 1 medium potato and loads of veg or large salad

P a g e | 65
Evening

Drink
Item fruit
Diet for Pregnant Women:
But during pregnancy nutritional needs of a woman shall increase to support the growth and
development of the growing fetus. Certain important nutrients like folic acid, vitamin A, iron and
calcium needs will be high to ensure proper growth and prevent any birth defects. Many foods
like alcohol, tea, coffee and fish with high mercury levels should be avoided as far as possible in
this group. A meal plan for an elderly male and female would focus mainly to suit the sedentary
lifestyle and to maintain a reasonable health. Further any health issues shall be considered first
before planning any diet for any age group.
Pregnancy :
Healthy eating guidelines for pregnancy and a suitable meal plan for expectant mothers
During pregnancy it's important to ensure optimal health for the mother as well as ideal nutrition
for the baby to ensure that he/she develops properly. It's important to eat sensibly and the basic
healthy eating guidelines apply with a few additional considerations:
a) Folic Acid (Folate)
Folic acid is a B vitamin and it has been shown that mothers need higher than normal amounts in
order to reduce the risk of neural tube defects (e.g. spina bifida) in the infant. Women who are
pregnant or who are planning a pregnancy should supplement with 0.4mg (400mcg) of folic acid
every day, and continue to do so for the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. Women who have
previously had a baby with a neural tube defect or who are on drug therapy for epilepsy are often
prescribed higher doses of 5mg per day (consult your doctor). In addition, expectant mothers are
encouraged to ensure their diet includes foods which are rich in folate, including citrus fruits and
juices, dark green leafy vegetables, legumes and whole grains as well as including good amounts
of foods which are fortified with additional folic acid, e.g. fortified breads, breakfast cereals and
yeast extract.
b) Vitamin A
High levels of some forms of vitamin A can harm the baby's development if taken in too high
amounts during pregnancy. Mothers therefore should avoid vitamin A supplements and food rich
in animal forms of vitamin A, for example liver, throughout their pregnancy.
c) Iron
It's important for the mother to consume good amounts of iron rich foods during pregnancy. Iron
from both animal food sources and plant sources are encouraged.
d) Calcium
This is important for healthy bones. Eat plenty of calcium rich foods and aim for 1,000mg per
day.

P a g e | 66
e) Nuts
Expectant mothers should avoid nuts, peanuts and nut products in order to reduce the risk of your
child developing a nut or peanut allergy. This is especially important if the mother suffers from
asthma, eczema or hay fever.
f) Oily Fish
Whilst a good intake of essential fats is important during pregnancy, too much oily fish that may
contain high levels of mercury is not advised. It is therefore suggested that an expectant mother
limits herself to two portions of oily fish per week.
g) Alcohol
Although there may be no harm in consuming a little alcohol occasionally during pregnancy, the
current recommendation is for an expectant mother to avoid alcohol altogether.
h) Tea / Coffee
High caffeine consumption has been linked to an increased risk of miscarriage, so it's probably
wise to limit caffeine. Cut down to a maximum of one or two cups of tea or coffee per day. More
recent studies have linked green tea to the lowering of folic acid levels, so try to avoid green tea
whislt trying to conceive and during the first 12 weeks of pregnacy; after 3 months, 1-2 cups of
green tea per day will be fine.
Healthy Weight
It's important that the mother doesn't gain excessive amounts of body fat and the ideal weight gain
is 9-13kg (1½ - 2 stones) during pregnancy. Excess weight gain is difficult to lose afterwards. If
you are overweight prior to becoming pregnant, then eat healthily during the pregnancy to
minimize any further weight gain.
Food Safety
It's especially important during pregnancy to ensure that food is prepared properly and free from
contamination in order to minimize risk of food poisoning. As pregnancy impairs a mother's
immune system, food poison bacteria like salmonella and listeria are even more of an issue. Avoid
the following: raw eggs or foods which contain raw eggs, unpasteurized milk, soft, unpasteurized
cheeses such as feta, goat, Brie, Camembert, and blue cheese and raw or undercooked meats or
fish.
Although the risk of listeria from deli meats is very low, as a matter of caution it's also best to
avoid deli meats during pregnancy.
Morning Sickness
This usually occurs only during the first four months. If it is a problem, stick to light energy-dense
foods, but never skip meals. A fizzy drink and a plain biscuit may be better tolerated. Avoid fried
and spicy foods.

P a g e | 67
Heartburn
This is not uncommon later in pregnancy. Again, avoid fried and spicy foods, and don't drink at
meal times.
Constipation
Eat plenty of high fibre foods and drink plenty of fluid (12 cups per day). However, avoid natural
unprocessed bran and unprescribed laxatives.
Breast Feeding
Generally this is encouraged over bottle feeding, as it helps provide the new-born infant with
optimal nutrition, aswell as helping the mother to lose some of the excess fat gained during
pregnancy from around the bum and hips. However if you do choose to breast feed drink plenty of
fluid and continue to heed all the points above.
The following meal plan is an example plan of a healthy diet which is suitable for a pregnant
mother. It is aimed at providing sufficient nutrition for both mother and infant with a healthy
weight gain for the mother. Use this to give you an idea of what are healthy and nutritious foods
to include, but don't forget to vary your food choices and to drink plenty of water through the day.
Food portion sizes will need to be adjusted to suit different women with different activities.
Breakfast

Midmorning

Lunch

Midafternoon

Evening
Meal

Evening

High fibre cereal (porridge, no added sugar muesli, Shredded Wheat, Weetabix,
etc) + 200ml skimmed milk and/or 1-2 slices granary bread with olive oil-based
spread and natural jam, marmalade, honey 250ml fruit juice
1-2 oatcakes or rye crisp bread
Banana
Tbsp sunflower seeds
Drink water
Sandwich: 2 slices granary bread + olive oil-based spread + cooked chicken
breast, sliced ham, tuna or cheese or 3-4 oatcakes or rye crisp bread with cottage
cheese
Mixed salad
Low fat / low sugar yoghurt
Drink water
1-2 oatcakes or rye crisp bread
Banana
Tbsp sunflower seeds
Drink water
Chicken breast or white fish or lean meat and (dry weight) basmati rice or whole
wheat pasta or 5-6 small boiled new potatoes or sweet potato
and loads of veg or large salad
Gravy / sauce – optional
Drink water
High fibre cereal (porridge, no added sugar muesli, Shredded Wheat, Weetabix,
etc) + 200ml skimmed milk
Drink water

P a g e | 68
As with all the meal plans this is merely a guide and a mother is encouraged to eat a variety of
different meats / fish / alternatives, complex carbohydrates, fruit and vegetables every day, and
drink plenty of water. Adapt the plan to suit your own needs and daily routine and vary portions
and food choices from day to day.
Elderly Person:
A meal plan for an elderly person who is moderately active and in reasonable health
The following example meal plan has been designed for a typical elderly individual. It's
nutritionally balanced to suit an elderly person who is moderately active and in reasonable health
in order to maintain their weight. Obviously this is based on an average elderly person, and there
may be significant variation in activity, mobility, weight, appetitive, etc, so like all plans, it is
merely an example and needs to be adapted to suit an individual's own lifestyle, daily routine and
nutritional requirements. Use this to give you an idea of what are healthy nutritious foods to
include, but don't forget to vary your food choices.
One particular concern in the elderly is obtaining sufficient fluid intake. Following retirement it's
not uncommon for people to drink less, as they no longer have scheduled coffee breaks at work.
The plan below includes drinks, but it's also recommended to drink more water throughout the
day. Some old people also have difficulty in passing stools; therefore a good fibre intake is
encouraged.
It's even more important that elderly people try to stick to meal and snack times, as sometimes
motivation to prepare food can be low, especially if you're only preparing meals for one. With
increased age and the onset of disease, some assistance may be required with preparation and
feeding.
Breakfast

Midmorning
Lunch

Midafternoon
Evening
Meal

High fibre cereal (like Weetabix, bran flakes, Shreddies, muesli, porridge,
etc) + 200ml skimmed milk + 1 tsp sugar
200ml fruit juice
Mug tea/coffee
2 digestive biscuits
Item fruit
Drink
Sandwich: 2 slices wholemeal bread + olive oil-based spread + slice
chicken/ham or 2 eggs (poached / scrambled / boiled) + 2 slices
wholemeal toast
Mixed salad
Low fat / low sugar yoghurt
Drink
Item fruit
Drink
Medium chicken breast or 200g white fish (cod / haddock / plaice / hake)
or lean cut beef / pork / lamb and 1 medium jacket potato or 3-4 small

P a g e | 69
boiled potatoes / mashed potato and loads of veg
Gravy – optional
Tinned or stewed fruit
Drink water
Evening
Hot milky drink
Vegetarian meal planning for Age group 6 to 12 months:
When you introduce solid foods to your baby for the first time, start with small portions once a
day. You can then move to twice a day and start increasing the portion size.
But do not try to force feed your baby. Instead, choose a time when your baby is hungry but not
yet sleepy. If he's sleepy, he might not be in an adventurous enough mood to try out new foods
and textures.
It is also important to try out one food at a time. When you introduce one food, give it to your
baby for at least five days before introducing another new food. This will make it easier for you to
pinpoint how your baby reacts to each food and spot allergies in case they appear.
Remember not to add any salt to your baby's food.
Vegetarian meal plan: six to seven months:
 Breakfast - breast or formula milk
 mid morning - breast or formula milk or stewed apple
 lunch - mashed rice mixed with breast or formula milk
 mid afternoon - breast or formula milk
 dinner - breast or formula milk
 bedtime - breast or formula milk
Vegetarian meal plan: eight to nine months:
 Breakfast - breast or formula milk
 mid morning - mashed banana
 lunch - mashed khichdi with carrots (gajar) and pumpkin (kaddu or sitaphal)
 mid afternoon - breast or formula milk
 dinner - mashed vegetable soup with potatoes
 bedtime - breast or formula milk
Vegetarian meal plan: 10 to 11 months:
 Breakfast - breast or formula milk
 mid morning - stewed pear
 lunch - mashed khichdi with vegetables and fruit or mashed idli with curd and vegetables
 mid afternoon - breast or formula milk
 dinner - mashed vegetable soup with potatoes or mashed khichdi with vegetables and fruit
 bedtime - breast or formula milk
Vegetarian meal plan: 12 months and beyond:
By now your baby will mostly be on solid foods. Here are several ideas for each meal time for
you to choose from:
 Breakfast - infant oats or porridge (dalia); idli with dal; rice dosa with mashed vegetables;
moong dal cheela; moong dal dosa; sooji/rawa upma (with or without vegetables)

P a g e | 70
mid morning - stewed fruit (apple or pear) or mashed banana
 lunch - mixed vegetables with rice; vegetable khichdi; roti soaked in dal and then mashed;
mashed kidney beans (rajma) or chickpeas (kabuli channa or chholey) with rice; paneer
 mid pm - breast or formula milk
 dinner - vegetable stew; roti soaked in vegetable stock or dal; pasta with tomato sauce; palak
paneer; whole wheat bread with milk; French toast; stuffed parantha
 bedtime - breast or formula milk
Vegetarian desserts from 8 months onwards:
 Fruit smoothies
 Stewed fruits with custard
 Rice, sooji or rawa, ragi (nachni) or lauki kheer
 fruit yoghurts
 Sooji or gajar ka halwa
 rawa kesari
It is best not to add any sugar as most fruits are naturally sweet to taste. However if you must add
sugar, use very little. Your baby's taste buds are still developing and it would be wise to restrict
sweet foods.


Meal Plan Patterns for Children According to Group:
Below are 4 different calorie levels for adults based on the basic food groups. It is best to decide
on a calorie level according to age, gender and weight. Talk with a doctor before changing your
meal plan patterns.
Food Group

Daily Calorie Level
1,200
1,600
1,800
2,200
Fruit
1 cup
1.5 cups
1.5 cups
2 cups
Vegetables
1.5 cups
2 cups
2.5 cups
3 cups
Grains
4 oz
5 oz
6 oz
7 oz
Leans meat and beans
3 oz
5 oz
5 oz
6 oz
Milk
2 cups
3 cups
3 cups
3 cups
Oils
4.5 tsp
5.5 tsp
6 tsp
7.5 tsp
Free-to-use Calories
170
130
195
290
* Free-to-use Calories can be used in various ways. If you are trying to lose weight, you may
choose NOT to use these calories. If you want to maintain your weight, then you CAN use these
calories.
Meal Plan Patterns for Adults According to Group:
Food Group
Fruit
Vegetables
Grains
Leans meat and beans
Milk
Oils
Free-to-use Calories

1,600
1.5 cups
2 cups
5 oz
5 oz
3 cups
5.5 tsp
130

Daily Calorie Level
2,000
2,400
2 cups
2 cups
2.5 cups
3 cups
6 oz
8 oz
5.5 oz
6.5 oz
3 cups
3 cups
7 tsp
8 tsp
270
360

2,800
2.5 cups
3.5 cups
10 oz
7 oz
3 cups
7 tsp
425

P a g e | 71
* Free-to-use Calories can be used in various ways. If you are trying to lose weight, you may
choose NOT to use these calories. If you want to maintain your weight, then you CAN use these
calories.
Methods of Cooking:
In cooking, there are some basic methods of cooking that are used. These commonly used basic
cooking methods are divided into two general groups. The groups are: Dry heat cookery methods
and Moist heat cookery methods. The methods of cooking are divided into these two groups
because of the way food is cooked and the type of heat that is used. Let us have a look at the Dry
Heat cookery methods.
A) Dry Heat Cooking Methods:
In dry heat cooking methods, the food being cooked does not use water to cook the food. The
food is left dry and heat is applied to cook the food. Such methods of cooking are: baking,
steaming, grilling, and roasting. When heat is applied to the food, the food cooks in its own juice
or the water added to the food during its preparation evaporates during the heating process and
this cooks the food. Heat is applied directly to the food by way of convection thus making the
food to get cooked. The action or movement of air around the food, cooks it. Let us now have a
look at each of these cooking methods

a) Baking
In baking method of cooking, the food is cooked using convection heating. The food is put into an
enclosed area where heat is then applied and the movement of heat within the confined space, acts
on the food that make it get cooked.

b) Steaming
To steam food, water is added to a pot and then a stand is placed inside the pot. The water level
should be under the stand and not above it. There is no contact between the food and the water
that is added to the pot. Food is then placed on the stand and heat is applied. The hot steam rising
from the boiling water acts on the food and the food gets cooked. It is the hot steam that cooks the
food, as there is no contact between the food and the water inside the pot. This method of cooking
for vegetables is very good as the food does not lose its flavour and much of the nutrients are not
lost during the cooking.

c) Grilling
There are two methods of grilling that are used these days. One type of grilling is the one that is
commonly used by the people in the village. This is when food is cooked over hot charcoal on an
open fire. The food is placed on top of the burning charcoal. Sometimes people improvise by
using wire mesh and place it over the open fire to grill fish or vegetables. The other method is
using grills that are inbuilt in stoves. In this method, the griller, which has a tray, is heated up and

P a g e | 72
the food is placed on the grill tray to cook. The heat can be gas-generated or electric-generated
depending on the type of stove used. The food is again left to cook on the grill with the doors of
the grill open. People who can afford to buy a stove would use the grilling part to grill their food.
What happens in this type of cooking is the heat seals the outside part of the food and the juice
inside the food cooks it. The flavour of the food is not lost and much of the nutrients are not lost
either. Food is frequently turned over to prevent it from burning and to ensure that equal heating
and cooking time is applied to both sides of the food. By doing this, the food is cooked evenly and
thoroughly.

d) Roasting
With roasting, direct heat is applied to the food. The heat seals the outside part of the food and the
juice inside the food cooks the food. Roasting is mainly used when cooking fleshy food like fish,
meat or chicken. When heat is applied to the outer covering of the food, it seals it up thereby
trapping all the juices inside the food. The action of direct heating, heats up the juices inside the
food, which then cooks the food. Again there is very little nutrient lost and the flavour is not
spoilt. Food is frequently rotated over the spit so that there is even heating applied to all parts of
the food. This is so that heat is applied evenly to the food to make it get cooked properly.
B) Moist Heat Cooking Methods :
In moist heat cookery methods, liquid is used as a medium to cook the food. Such medium could
be water, coconut cream or oil. These liquids are added to the food before heat is applied to it or
sometimes heat is applied to the liquid before the food is added into the cooking utensils to be
cooked. The moist heat cookery methods include: boiling, stewing, shallow frying, deep frying,
barbequing and basting. All these moist heat cooking methods use liquid to cook the food in.

a) Boiling
This is the most common method of cooking and is also the simplest. With this method of
cooking, enough water is added to food and it is then cooked over the fire. The action of the
heated water makes the food to get cooked. The liquid is usually thrown away after the food is
cooked. In the case of cooking rice, all the water is absorbed by the rice grains to make it get
cooked. During the heating process, the nutrients can get lost or destroyed and the flavour can be
reduced with this method of cooking. If you over cooked cabbage, all the nutrients can get lost.

b) Stewing
In the process of cooking using the stewing method, food is cooked using a lot of liquid. Different
kinds of vegetables are chopped, diced or cubed and added to the pot. Sometimes pieces of
selected meat, fish or chicken is also chopped and added to the stew. The liquid is slightly
thickened and stewed food is served in that manner. This method is also used when preparing
fruits that are going to be served as desserts. With this cooking method, every food is cooked

P a g e | 73
together at the same time in one pot. The flavour, colours, shapes and textures of the different
vegetables that are used, makes stewing a handy method of cooking. The only disadvantage is that
some of the vegetables might be overcooked and thus the nutrient content becomes much less. It
is therefore important that the vegetables that take the longest to cook to be put into the pot first
and the ones that need least cooking to be put in last. In this way much of the nutrient contents of
the food does not get lost.

c) Frying
When food is fried using oil or solid fat it is important that you observe some rules in handling oil
or fat. Simple rules to follow when frying: 1.Make sure there is enough oil or fat put in the frying
pan or a deep frying pan. 2.The food to be cooked must not have water dripping from it. This is
because when water comes into contact with hot oil or fat, you will have the oil sizzling and
spitting out of the pan, which could burn your skin if you are not careful. 3.Put the food into the
hot oil carefully. Try not to make a big splash as the oil could burn your skin. 4.The oil of fat
should be heated to the right temperature before putting food into the pan to be fried. If the food is
put in when the oil or fat is not heated to the right temperature, the food will soak up the oil and
you will have food that is all oily or greasy. If the oil or fat is over heated, you will end up with
food that is burnt. Sometimes the food especially doughnuts will turn brown on the outside but the
dough inside is uncooked. To cook food using the frying method, there are two ways of doing it.
There is the shallow frying and the deep frying methods.

d) Shallow Frying
In shallow frying, food is cooked in a frying pan with a little amount of oil or fat. The oil or fat is
heated to the correct amount and the food is put into the heated oil. The food is turned over a few
minutes or is stirred around a couple of times before it is cooked and dished out. If patties, potato
chips or coated foods are fried, it is best to put a piece of brown paper or paper napkin inside the
tray to soak up any oil from the food before serving it.

e) Deep Frying
This is when a lot of oil or fat is used in cooking the food. The oil or fat is usually put into a deep
pan and is heated to boiling point. Food is then put into the hot boiling oil and is cooked in that
way. Such food as fish fingers, potato chips, meat balls, and dough nuts to name a few, are cooked
using the deep frying method.

f) Barbequing
The method of cooking food by barbequing is usually associated with fund raising activities,
parties or picnics. It is most suitable to cooking meat cutlets, fish or chicken pieces. The food is
usually marinated with spices and tenderizers (for meat cuts) for sometime before it is cooked.
With this method of cooking, a sheet of metal with stands is heated up and oil is used to cook the

P a g e | 74
food. A sufficient amount of oil is heated up and food is added. The food is then turned over a
couple of times before it is dished out.

g) Basting
This method of cooking is usually associated with roasting. The juice or liquid that comes out of
the meat being cooked is spooned over the roast frequently while it is being roasted. The outer
part of the meat is moistened frequently during the cooking process with the juice that is being
spooned over. Usually, the extra juice from the cooked meat is added to a mixture to make the
meat sauce.
Other methods :
Some foods that require a long time to cook, such as stews and dried beans may be prepared more
quickly in a pressure sauce pan. This utensil cooks foods at high temperatures by means of steam
under pressure. Pressure saucepans are also called pressure cookers.
Another fast method of cooking uses microwaves (short radio waves). Microwave ovens heat
small amounts of foods much faster than gas or electric ovens or cook tops do. Microwave ovens
are especially useful for thawing frozen foods and heating soups, vegetables, and leftovers.
Food Adulterations and its Effects:
Food adulteration is the addition or removal of any substances to or from food, so that the natural
composition and quality is affected. Adulterated food is impure, unsafe and not wholesome. Food
can be adulterated intentionally and accidentally. Unintentional adulteration is a result of
ignorance or the lack of facilities to maintain food quality. This may be caused by spillover effect
from pesticides and fertilizers. Inappropriate food handling and packaging methods can also result
in adulteration. 25 to 30 per cent of the food items in India are intentionally adulterated.
Intentional food adulteration is usually done for financial gain. The most common form of
intentional adulteration is colour adulteration. Some examples of intentional adulteration are
addition of water to liquid milk, extraneous matter to ground spices, or the removal or substitution
of milk solids from the natural product. Natural adulteration occurs due to the presence of certain
chemicals, organic compounds or radicals naturally occurring in foods which are injurious to
health and are not added to the foods intentionally or unintentionally. Some of the examples are
toxic varieties of pulses, mushrooms, green and other vegetables, fish and sea foods. About 5,000
species of marine fish are known to be poisonous and many of these are among edible varieties.
Beyond safety limit
Mineral oil may be added to edible oil and fats and can cause cancers. Lead chromate added to
turmeric powder and spices can cause anaemia, paralysis, brain damage and abortions. Lead
added to water, natural and processed food can lead to lead poisoning. Lead poisoning causes foot
drop, insomnia, constipation, anaemia, and mental retardation. Cobalt added to water and liquors

P a g e | 75
and can cause cardiac damage. Copper, tin and zinc can cause colic, vomiting and diarrhoea.
Mercury in mercury fungicide treated grains or mercury contaminated fish can cause brain
damage, paralysis and death. Non-permitted colour or permitted food colour like metanil yellow,
beyond the safe limit in coloured food can cause allergies, hyperactivity, liver damage, infertility,
anaemia, cancer and birth defects.
Adulteration in Food Stuff and its Harmful Effects:
Food Article
Adulterant
Bengal Gram dal and Kesari dal
Thoor Dal
Tea
Used tea leaves processed and
coloured
Coffee Powder
Tamarind seed, date seed powder
Chicory powder
Milk
Khoa
Wheat and other
food grains (Bajra)
Sugar
Black powder
Mustard powder

Unhygenic water and Starch
Starch and Less Fat content
Ergot (a fungus containing
poisonous substance)
Chalk powder
Papaya Seeds and light berrys
Argemone seeds

Edible oils

Argemone oil
Mineral oil
Karanja oil

Asafoetida
Turmeric powder

Chilli powder
Sweets, Juices, Jam
Jaggery
Pulses (Green peas
and dhal)
Supari

Castor oil
Foreign resins galbanum, colophony
resin
Yellow aniline dyes
Non-permitted colourants like
metanil yellow
Tapioca starch
Brick powder, saw dust
Artificial Colours
Non-permitted coal tar dye, (Metanil
Yellow)
Washing soda, chalk powder
Coal tar dye
Colour and saccharin

Harmful Effects
Lahyrism cancer
Liver Disorder
Diarrhoea
Stomach disorder, Giddiness
and joint pain
Stomach disorder
Less - nutritive value
Poisonous
Stomach - Disorder
Stomach, liver problems
Epidemic dropsy and
Glucoma
Loss of eyesight, heart
diseases, tumour
Damage to liver,
carcinogenic effects
Heart problems, liver
damage
Stomach problem
dysentery
Carcinogenic
Highly Carcinogenic
Stomach disorder
Stomach problems
Cancer
Metanil yellow is toxic and
carcinogenic
vomiting, diarrhea
stomach pain, ulcer
Cancer

P a g e | 76
Honey
Carbonator water
beverages
Cloves

Molasses sugar (sugar plus water)
Aluminium leaves

Stomach disorder
Stomach Disorder

Cloves from which volatile oil has
been extracted

cheating waste of money

Prevention
The best way to avoid these health problems is prevention. There are many steps we can take to
ensure this. We can begin by taking interest in the place from where we buy our food ingredients,
for example, is it from a reputed shop or retailer, we need to check out. We also need to check if
these outlets are regularly checked by food inspectors and if the premises are kept clean with no
infestations. We need to check if the packaging is intact, as also the expiry date and the source of
the product. It is also necessary to talk regularly to the local community to check if people are
falling sick after eating in a particular restaurant or food ingredients bought from a particular
retailer. We should also create awareness in the local community on the ill effects of food
adulteration so that when it happens the public knows when to seek help.
We need to remember that contamination could happen in very small amounts over a period of
time and it might be impossible to detect or too late to intervene. So it is prudent that every one of
us takes special interest in this subject and educate our families, friends and colleagues about this
menace.
Alcoholism:
An alcoholic is a person, while alcoholism is the illness. An alcoholic suffers from alcoholism.
Alcoholism is a long-term (chronic) disease.
Alcoholism is a chronic and often progressive disease that includes problems controlling your
drinking, being preoccupied with alcohol, continuing to use alcohol even when it causes
problems, having to drink more to get the same effect (physical dependence), or having
withdrawal symptoms when you rapidly decrease or stop drinking. If you have alcoholism, you
can't consistently predict how much you'll drink, how long you'll drink, or what consequences will
occur from your drinking.
Alcoholism is a disease with four main features:

a) Craving - a strong need to drink
b) Loss of control - not being able to stop drinking once you've started
c) Physical dependence - withdrawal symptoms, such as nausea, sweating, or shakiness when
you don't drink

d) Tolerance - the need to drink greater amounts of alcohol to feel the same effect

P a g e | 77
It's possible to have a problem with alcohol, even when it has not progressed to the point of
alcoholism. Problem drinking means you drink too much at times, causing repeated problems in
your life, although you're not completely dependent on alcohol.
Binge drinking: A pattern of drinking where a male consumes five or more drinks in a row, or a
female downs at least four drinks in a row, can lead to the same health risks and social problems
associated with alcoholism. The more you drink, the greater the risks. Binge drinking, which often
occurs with teenagers and young adults, may lead to faster development of alcoholism.
Alcoholism carries many serious dangers. Heavy drinking can increase the risk of certain cancers.
It can cause damage to the liver, brain, and other organs. Drinking during pregnancy can harm
your baby. Alcoholism also increases the risk of death from car crashes, injuries, homicide, and
suicide.
If you want to stop drinking, there is help. Start by talking to your health care provider.
Medicines, counseling, and support groups may help you to stop drinking.
Therapeutic diet and its Types:
A therapeutic diet is a medically prescribed eating plan recommended as a mode of treatment for
a chronic disease. It usually requires you to eliminate or limit certain types of foods, eat more of
certain types of foods, change the consistency of your foods or alter your eating pattern.
A therapeutic diet is a diet that is formulated usually by nutritionists, dieticians, and medical
doctors to aid in the healing of the body from certain types of injuries and diseases. Therapeutic
treatments involving food are also prescribed for medical conditions that affect the psychological
state of the individual as well, such as weakness caused by anorexia, or a loss of appetite due to
depression, loneliness, and other mental states that can discourage healthy eating. More common
conditions that may require a therapeutic diet include the loss of teeth with age, which may
necessitate a diet of soft foods, or a calorie-, fat-, and sodium-controlled diet to treat such routine
conditions as being overweight, having high cholesterol levels, or being borderline diabetes.
Types of Therapeutic diets:
1. Diabetic – consistent carbohydrates
2. Heart diets – low fat low salt
3. Renal – low potassium
4. Bowel health – high fiber
5. Food intolerance – gluten, dairy
6. Food allergy – peanut, soy, fish
7. Malnutrition – high energy/high protein
8. Wound management – high protein/energy
9. Sodium restricted diet

P a g e | 78
10. Bland diet
11. Low residue diet
12. Regular diet
13. Liquid diet
14. Soft diet
15. Calorie controlled diet
The diabetic diet helps in figuring the deficiency or diminished effectiveness of insulin to
maintain blood glucose in the normal range. The therapeutic diet then helps in examining the
unrefined carbohydrates eaten. An excess leads to limiting the intake of food products rich
carbohydrates.
Heart problems are normally caused by fat can cause blockages in arteries, which can lead to
excessive weight. The heart diet helps in reducing saturated fats and limits the intake of excessive
sugar. This therapeutic diet is used to cure cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension or
congestive heart disease, kidney disease, and edema. One has to avoid or limit addition of salt to
any food, smoked meats or fish, processed foods, pickles, sauerkraut, olives, and processed
cheeses.
The high fiber diet helps the body in curing constipation related problems by increasing fiber in
the diet. It is advised to consume a lot of fluids in this diet.
A regular diet is a diet which is usually used for ambulatory patients. It has less caloric content in
it and most fried foods and rich desserts are to be avoided in this diet.
A soft diet is similar to regular diet but foods must require little chewing and be easy to digest. It
is said that one should avoid meat and shellfish with tough connective tissue, coarse cereals, spicy
foods, rich desserts, fried foods, raw fruits and veggies, nuts, and coconuts.
The high protein diet is all about children and adolescents who need additional growth, pregnant
or lactating women, before and/or after surgery, suffering from burns, fevers, or infections. One
can follow a regular diet with added protein rich foods such as meats, fish, milk, cheese, and eggs.
There are many drawbacks to the therapeutic diet plan. It can cause, A patient’s appetite may be
affected by this reduced or loss of appetite, weakness, illness, loneliness, self-pity and other
factors.
One can use patience and tact to convince patient to eat food and understand purpose of
therapeutic diet and provide simple explanations to patient. A therapeutic diet is not supposed to
make one person ill.
Diet modification in Diseases:
Certain medical conditions require a modification in the texture of a diet because of swallowing or
chewing difficulties. A liquid diet, for example, would be prescribed for a post-surgical patient

P a g e | 79
who needs easily digested nutrition or a person who has had oral surgery and is unable to
consume larger chunks of food. A puréed or blended diet would be provided for an elderly
nursing home patient who is unable to chew food to a safe consistency for swallowing. When a
soft diet is prescribed, tough meats are either chopped or ground and served with a sauce or gravy
for easier chewing and swallowing. Foods such as corn on the cob or nuts are eliminated from a
soft diet.
Diet therapy also refers to nutrient modification for therapeutic purposes. A diet type described as
“low” would minimize a certain nutrient or nutrients. A low-fiber diet, for example, might be
prescribed for a patient after stomach or intestinal surgery to reduce the amount of digestion
taking place after a meal. Other diet therapy types that minimize nutrients include a lowcholesterol diet, a low-sodium diet or a low-oxalate diet.
Certain conditions require an increase in nutrient intake. Pregnancy diets are prescribed to supply
the mother and fetus with extra calories, protein, iron and folate. A high-fiber diet might be
recommended for patients suffering from constipation, which is a side effect of many pain
medications.
A comprehensive diet plan, prescribed for patients with multiple issues, might increase certain
nutrients and minimize others. Patients who suffer from heart disease, diabetes or obesity might
be prescribed a plan that reduces the amount of calories, fats and sugars in the diet but increases
fiber and protein intake for satiety. For a person to ensure that a diet therapy regimen is sound and
appropriate for a particular medical condition, it is important for him or her discuss nutritional
intake, including the use of alternative therapies such as dietary supplements, with a licensed
healthcare provider.
DASH Diet:
The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension, also known as the DASH diet, is a therapeutic diet
used to treat high blood pressure. The diet encourages you to eat foods that contain high amounts
of potassium, magnesium, calcium and fiber to help lower your blood pressure. It also
recommends you limit your intake of sodium to 1,500 mg a day if you have high blood pressure.
The DASH diet is considered an overall healthy diet and has also been shown to be helpful for
those wishing to lose weight and prevent the onset of diabetes. The diet includes high amounts of
fruits, vegetables and whole grains, along with lean sources of protein, low-fat dairy foods, nuts,
seeds and legumes.
Representative Diet in Various Diseases:
Diabetic Diet:
The diabetic diet is a therapeutic diet for treatment of diabetes. The principle behind the eating
plan is that people with diabetes have a difficult time managing the sugar their body produces

P a g e | 80
from the food they eat due to an inability to make enough insulin or properly use the insulin they
do make. The diabetic diet aims to control the amount of food you eat, especially foods that
dramatically affect blood sugar, to help manage the disease. The diet is not overly restrictive, but
encourages you to make wise food choices from each of the food groups to maximize your
nutritional intake. The diet also aims to promote a healthy weight because this improves blood
sugar management.
Diet for Diabetic mellitus:
If you have diabetes, your body cannot make or properly use insulin. This leads to high blood
glucose, or blood sugar, levels. Healthy eating helps keep your blood sugar in your target range. It
is a critical part of managing your diabetes, because controlling your blood sugar can prevent the
complications of diabetes.
A registered dietitian can help make an eating plan just for you. It should take into account your
weight, medicines, lifestyle, and other health problems you have.
Healthy diabetic eating includes


Limiting foods that are high in sugar



Eating smaller portions, spread out over the day



Being careful about when and how many carbohydrates you eat



Eating a variety of whole-grain foods, fruits and vegetables every day



Eating less fat



Limiting your use of alcohol



Using less salt

Diets for Cardiovascular Diseases:
The role of diet is crucial in the development and prevention of cardiovascular disease. Diet is one
of the key things you can change that will impact all other cardiovascular risk factors.
Comparisons between a diet low in saturated fats, with plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables, and
the typical diet of someone living in the developed world show that in the former there is a 73%
reduction in the risk of new major cardiac events.
Fat
Research makes it clear that abnormal blood lipid (fat) levels have a strong correlation with the
risk of coronary artery disease, heart attack and coronary death. In turn, abnormal blood lipids are
related to what you eat. A diet high in saturated fats (e.g. cheese) and trans fats (often used in
cakes, cookies and fast food) leads to high levels of cholesterol.
Saturated fats are found in animal products. Trans fats are oils that have been hydrogenated to
turn them into semi-hard fats. Hydrogenated fat is found in processed food like shop-bought

P a g e | 81
cakes, biscuits, stock cubes and a range of other products you buy every day. Saturated and trans
fats raise cholesterol levels in the blood, which in turn can lead to atherosclerosis.
Unsaturated fats, polyunsaturated and monounsaturated are beneficial for heart health. They are
present in fish, nuts, seeds and vegetables.
The essential fatty acids omega-3 and omega-6 are found in oily fish and in nuts and seeds. Our
bodies cannot make these acids so we have to eat them to gain their benefits, which include
improving cholesterol levels in the body.
But it is important to note that if your total fat intake is greater than 37% of your total calories,
then even if that fat is unsaturated you increase your risk of cardiovascular disease. Saturated fat
intake should not exceed 10% of total energy and for high-risk groups, like people with diabetes,
total fat intake should be 7% or less of total energy.
Sodium
High blood pressure (hypertension) is a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease. If you have a
diet high in sodium you risk hypertension.
It has been estimated that a universal reduction in dietary intake of sodium by about 1g of sodium
a day, about 3g of salt, would lead to a 50% reduction in the number of people needing treatment
for hypertension. The same decrease would lead to a 22% drop in the number of deaths resulting
from strokes and a 16% fall in the number of deaths from coronary heart disease.
Fruits and vegetables
Eating a diet high in fresh fruits and vegetables protects your heart. Low fruit and vegetable intake
accounts for about 20% of cardiovascular disease worldwide. Fruit and vegetables contain
components that protect against heart disease and stroke.
Wholegrain cereals
Whole grains are unrefined and do not have the bran or germ removed. They contain folic acid, B
vitamins and fiber, all of which are important protectors against heart disease. Processed grains
like that used to make white bread and pasta do not have the same benefits as wholegrain cereals.
Fish
In countries where fish consumption is high there is a reduced risk of death from all causes as
well as cardiovascular mortality.
Nuts
Eating nuts regularly is associated with decreased risk of coronary heart disease.
Soy
There is evidence that soy has a beneficial effect on blood lipid levels. Eating 47g of soy protein a
day led to a 9% drop in total cholesterol and a 13% reduction in LDL cholesterol in one study of
people without any heart disease.

P a g e | 82
Alcohol
If you have the occasional drink you may protect your heart, but only if you drink in moderation.
Diet for Obesity:
The optimal management of overweight and obesity requires a combination of diet, exercise and
behavioral modification. In addition, some patients eventually require pharmacologic therapy or
bariatric surgery. The risk of overweight to the subject should be evaluated before beginning any
treatment program. Selection of treatment can then be made using a risk-benefit assessment. The
choice of therapy is dependent on several factors including the degree of overweight or obesity
and patient preference.
Most people will need to reduce their daily kilojoule intake in order to lose weight. This means
eating and drinking less and making healthier food choices. One way to do this is to swap
unhealthy and high energy food choices such as fast food, processed food and sugary drinks
(including alcohol) for healthier choices.

a) Enjoy a wide variety of nutritious foods from these five groups every day:


Plenty of vegetables, including different types and colours, and legumes/beans



Fruit



Grain (cereal) foods, mostly wholegrain and/or high cereal fibre varieties, such as bread,
cereals, rice, pasta, noodles, polenta, couscous, oats, quinoa and barley



Lean meats and poultry, fish, eggs, tofu, nuts and seeds, and legumes/beans



Milk, yoghurt, cheese and/or their alternatives, mostly reduced fat (reduced fat milks are
not suitable for children under 2 years)

b) Drink plenty of water.
c) Limit intake of foods containing saturated fat, added salt, added sugars and alcohol.
Avoid fad diets
Avoid fad diets that recommend unsafe practices such as fasting (going without food for long
periods of time) or cutting out entire food groups such as meat, fish, wheat or dairy products.
These are not sustainable, can make you feel ill, and may cause unpleasant side effects such as
bad breath, diarrhoea and headaches.
This is not to say that all commercial diet programmes are unsafe. Many are based on sound
medical and scientific principles and can work well in some people.
Choose a responsible diet programme that:


educates you about issues such as portion size, making changes to long-term behaviour and
healthy eating



is not overly restrictive in terms of the type of food you can eat

P a g e | 83


is based on achieving gradual sustainable weight loss rather short-term rapid weight loss,
which is unlikely to last

Very low calorie diet
A very low calorie diet (VLCD) is a diet that involves consuming less than containing less than
3350 kilojoules (800 calories) per day.
While a VLCD can be an effective method of losing weight for some obese people, is it not a
suitable or safe method for everyone. It would usually only be recommended if rapid weight loss
was required to reduce the risk of an obesity-related complication such as heart disease, or if you
have failed to lose weight despite conventional treatment. You should only ever undertake a
VLCD under the supervision of a suitably qualified health professional.
Diet for Arteriosclerosis:
Arteriosclerosis is the stiffening or hardening of the artery walls while Atherosclerosis is the
narrowing of the artery because of plaque build-up.
Arteriosclerosis characterized by irregularly distributed lipid deposits in the intima of large and
medium-sized arteries, causing narrowing of arterial lumens and proceeding eventually to fibrosis
and calcification. Lesions are usually focal and progress slowly and intermittently. Limitation of
blood flow accounts for most clinical manifestations, which vary with the distribution and
severity of lesions. In lower animals, atherosclerosis of swine and fowl closely resemble human
atherosclerosis.
Atherosclerosis or arteriosclerotic vascular disease is a condition where the arteries become
narrowed and hardened due to an excessive build up of plaque around the artery wall. The disease
disrupts the flow of blood around the body, posing serious cardiovascular complications.
A proper diet is the best way to prevent the development of arteriosclerosis. In the diet of
arteriosclerosis should consider the following tips:
Diet for Arteriosclerosis
d) Food rich in Omega 3 and fibre : Flaxseed and chia, Quinua, Lentils and chickpeas, Brown
bread and whole rice
e) Vitamin C, licopene, betacarotene : Carrots, oranges and mangoes, Peppers and tomato sauce
f) Vegetables (Fibres and folic acids)
g) Onion and garlic
Food for Arteriosclerosis:
A vegetarian diet, rich in natural plant foods , is the best way to avoid the appearance of this
disease.
This diet should be rich in vegetables which provide much needed components for healthy
arteries.

P a g e | 84
Vegetables are high in fiber, particularly soluble fiber that has the ability to limit cholesterol
absorption and many toxins that can damage arteries. Both cholesterol and toxic substances are
trapped in the fiber that vegetables provide and are tossed out through the feces before being
absorbed by the body.
It has been shown that deficiency of vitamin B6, vitamin E and methionine, magnesium, and
selenium deficiency are most responsible for reducing the flow of blood, making it a more viscous
liquid. Most vegetables contain vitamin B6 and legumes are rich in vegetable protein with a high
content of methionine.
In this way the vegetables can be an alternative to other foods of animal origin which are rich in
protein as beef and lamb, but at the same time they contain too much cholesterol, the main cause
of atherosclerosis.
Eating foods rich in potassium and low in sodium will help eliminate excessive body water,
reducing the sodium level which will help to lower blood pressure Among the foods richest in
potassium we can choose potatoes, kiwis, bananas, tomatoes, peaches or grapes.
Eating vegetables means eating many antioxidants, which are responsible for the oxidation of the
cells of arteries and can support the development of this disease. Among the most important
antioxidants of vegetables the most important ones are vitamin A, that plants provide in the form
of beta carotene, which the body converts into vitamin A.
Plants that contain provitamine A are specially dark green, orange, red or yellow food plants, such
carrots, purslane, spinachs, watercress and borage .
Other

plants

that

contain

it

are,

for

example, basil,

squash,

tomatoes,

coriander,

asparagus, dandelion, peppers, watermelon, melon, Brussels sprouts, bananas, apples, plums,
oranges, raspberries, mangos, beans, etc.
No less important is the vitamin C as an antioxidant. Present in many plant foods but especially in
citrus fruits (oranges, lemons, tangerines, etc.) A morning daily glass of orange juice or lemon is
one of the best medicines to prevent hardening of the arteries.
Peppers are very rich in this vitamin. Other plants that contain this vitamin include cauliflowers,
radishes, Brussels sprouts, spinach, bananas, apples, melons, watermelons, carrots, pineapples,
pears, papayas, barley, garlic, berries, celery, peas, strawberries, grapes, figs, beans, chicory,
blueberries, potatoes, avocados, soybeans, cherimoyas, pomegranates, coconuts, etc.
Complete the vegetarian food with oily fish
Oily fish is rich in omega 3 fatty acids that can increase good cholesterol "HDL" and counteract
the negative effects that "bad "cholesterol (LDL) provides. The main fish that contain this
component are sardines, herring, tuna, salmon, etc.

P a g e | 85
Super foods for Arteriosclerosis:
The best foods that should become part of the staple diet of arteriosclerosis are:
i) Onions : For its component contents blood thinners.
ii) Garlic : As onion is a good a blood thinner.
iii) Soybean: The soybean for its content in lecithin and other components: Soy is a very
interesting food for circulation. It has been established as the replacement of animal protein, this
food may reduce by 20% the rate of cholesterol in the blood.
The isoflavone genistein not only helps reduce bad cholesterol (LDL) and triglycerides, but also
improves overall circulation by increasing the flexibility of the arteries and make blood flow more
easily.
In addition to isoflavones also involved in this property its content in omega-3 fatty acids. This
may explain why vegetarians, often consuming soy, have more flexible and young arteries than
people eating all kind of food.
However, the cardiovascular properties of this food are not only useful for people who only eat
vegetables. It has been shown as people who eat meat frequently have their cholesterol levels
reduced or not increased when they include a daily ration of this legume in the diet. Somehow this
food counteracts the negative effects of the cholesterol of animal flesh.
iv) Ginger: Ginger constitutes a good resource to favor blood circulation. It helps to
dissolve blood clots in the arteries and diminish the levels of cholesterol in blood. By making
blood more fluid it helps to prevent a series of vascular accidents, such as heart attacks, angina
pectoris or thrombosis.
Its use prevents heart attacks, angina pectoris or thrombosis. It can constitute a natural alternative
to conventional treatments, such as aspirin (Eat it together with other foods, especially with onion
and garlic) For those who find it to "punchy" may take it in form of supplements (Take 3 capsules
of 250 mg a day, distributed among the main meals) (Look for contraindications or toxicity in the
general study of the plant)
v) Walnuts: They are extremely interesting for their vegetable polyunsaturated fats. Although,
as olive oil, they contain oleic acid (monounsaturated) which has proved very effective and
reliable in the reduction of the levels of cholesterol in blood, their wealth in linoleic and alphalinoleic acids (polyunsaturated) confer them more interesting properties to reduce this component
and to prevent illnesses of the circulatory system that affect to our heart and arteries.
vi) Pepper (Piper nigrum): Due to its fluidizing properties for the blood, black pepper is used to
treat arteriosclerosis and to prevent blood clotting (Add pepper to your food. Max. 5 gm daily)
Nuts constitute a good source of vitamin E with antioxidant properties, so they will be very
effective to avoid the negative influence of free radicals in arteries.

P a g e | 86
vii) Foods with high soluble fiber content: Choosing foods high in soluble fiber hinders the
absorption of cholesterol through the intestinal wall, so that a diet rich in vegetables containing a
lot of soluble will help reduce all those diseases related with cholesterol. Foods containing high
levels of this component are oats, beans, pears or apples.
Non Adequate foods for Arteriosclerosis:
i) Avoid eating canned food: Canned food should be avoided, either from animal or vegetable
origin, because of its high sodium content.
ii) Avoid eating red meat and fried foods. These foods are rich in cholesterol and should be
avoided or eaten very gently to prevent the onset of atherosclerosis. In case of disease is better to
refuse them.
iii) Avoid eating foods high in sugar because they promote obesity and thicken the blood.
Among these natural juices are included , whose consumption should be restricted and limited to
half a liter a day, diluted and divided into several doses.
iv) Can you take alcohol? A very moderate alcohol consumption can help improve circulation.
However, we should not become accustomed to their intake to avoid the risk of alcoholism.
v) Coffee and arteriosclerosis? / Tea and arteriosclerosis? : Coffee acts on the liver, increasing
cholesterol levels. Not so with the tea, which can be taken, especially green tea that it is very
suitable for circulatory diseases. Both of them contain high amounts of caffeine, but it seems that,
apart from caffeine, there must be some other components in coffee that make it not suitable for
arteriosclerosis.
Green tea diminishes cholesterol, makes blood more fluid, energizes the heart and protects it from
angina pectoris or heart attack. Histidine constitutes a good antiarteriosclerotic. Theanine, an
amino-acid that can only be found in this plant, realizes the same function, beside avoiding the
formation of thrombus or blood clots, a property also accomplished by eugenol. Theobromine is a
vasodilator and cardiotonic.
vi) Eggs for arteriosclerosis? Egg yolk contains a lot of cholesterol, but the white of an egg is
rich in lecithin which counteracts in part the content of the yolk. Moderate consumption of eggs
(One or two a week) should not harm the person suffering from arteriosclerosis or favor its
appearance)
Diet for Kidney Diseases :
When you have chronic kidney disease, you need to make changes in your diet, including:


Limiting fluids



Eating a low-protein diet (this may be recommended)



Restricting salt, potassium, phosphorous, and other electrolytes



Getting enough calories if you are losing weight

P a g e | 87
Your recommended diet may change over time if your kidney disease gets worse, or if you need
dialysis.
Function
The purpose of this diet is to maintain a balance of electrolytes, minerals, and fluid in patients
who have chronic kidney disease or who are on dialysis. Patients who are on dialysis need this
special diet to limit the buildup of waste products in their body. These waste products can also
build up between dialysis treatments.
Most dialysis patients urinate very little or not at all. Limiting fluids between treatments is very
important. Without urination, fluid will build up in the body and lead to excess fluid in the heart,
lungs and ankles.
Recommendations
i) Carbohydrates:
If you are overweight or have diabetes, you may need to limit the amount of carbohydrates you
eat. Talk with your doctor, nurse, or dietitian.
Otherwise, carbohydrates are a good source of energy for your body. If your health care provider
has recommended a low-protein diet, you may replace the calories from protein with:


Fruits, breads, grains, and vegetables. These foods provide energy, as well as fiber, minerals,
and vitamins.



Hard candies, sugar, honey, and jelly. If needed, you can even eat high-calorie desserts such
as pies, cakes, or cookies, as long as you limit desserts made with dairy, chocolate, nuts, or
bananas.

ii) Fats:
Fats can be a good source of calories. Make sure to use monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats
(olive oil, canola oil, safflower oil) to help protect your arteries. Talk to your doctor, nurse, or
dietitian about fats and cholesterol that may increase your risk for heart problems.
iii) Protein:
Low-protein diets may be helpful before you start dialysis. Your doctor or dietitian may
recommend a moderate-protein diet (1 gram of protein per kilogram of body weight per day).
Once you start dialysis, you will need to eat more protein. In fact, a high-protein diet with fish,
poultry, pork, or eggs at every meal may be recommended. This will help you replace muscles
and other tissues that you lose.
People on dialysis should eat 8 - 10 ounces of high-protein foods each day. Your doctor, dietitian,
or nurse may suggest adding egg whites, egg white powder, or protein powder.

P a g e | 88
iv) Calcium and Phosphorous:
Calcium and phosphorous, two other important minerals in the body, are also monitored closely.
Even in the early stages of chronic kidney disease, phosphorous levels in the blood can become
too high. This can cause:


Low calcium (this causes the body to pull calcium from your bones, which can make your
bones weaker and more likely to break)



Itching

You will need to limit the amount of dairy foods you eat, because they contain large amounts of
phosphorous. This includes milk, yogurt, and cheese. Some dairy foods are lower in phosphorous,
including tub margarine, butter, cream cheese, heavy cream, ricotta cheese, brie cheese, sherbet,
and nondairy whipped toppings.
Fruits and vegetables contain only small amounts of phosphorous, but may contain large amounts
of potassium.
You may need to take calcium supplements to prevent bone disease, and vitamin D to control the
balance of calcium and phosphorous in your body. Ask your doctor, nurse, or dietitian.
If diet changes to lower phosphorous are not enough, your doctor may recommend "phosphorous
binders."
v) Fluids:
In the early stages of chronic kidney disease, you do not need to limit how much fluid you drink.
As your kidney disease becomes worse or when you are on dialysis, you will need to watch how
much liquid you drink. In between dialysis sessions, fluid can build up in the body. Too much
fluid will lead to shortness of breath, an emergency that needs immediate medical attention.
Your doctor and dialysis nurse will let you know how much you should drink every day. Do not
eat too much of foods that contain a lot of water, such as soups, Jell-O, popsicles, ice cream,
grapes, melons, lettuce, tomatoes, and celery.
Use smaller cups or glasses and turn over your cup after you have finished it.


Avoid salty foods



Freeze some juice in an ice cube tray and eat it like a popsicle (you must count these ice cubes
in your daily amount of fluids)



Stay cool on hot days

vi) Salt or Sodium:
Reducing sodium in your diet helps you control high blood pressure, keeps you from being
thirsty, and prevents your body from holding onto extra fluid. You will probably need to eat a
low-salt diet.
Look for these words on food labels:

P a g e | 89


Low-sodium



No salt added



Sodium-free



Sodium reduced



Unsalted

Check all labels to see how much salt or sodium foods contain per serving. Also, avoid foods that
list salt near the beginning of the ingredients. Look for products with less than 100 mg of salt per
serving.
DO NOT use salt when cooking and take the salt shaker away from the table. Most other herbs are
safe and you can use them to flavor your food instead of salt.
DO NOT use salt substitutes because they contain potassium. People with chronic kidney disease
also need to limit their potassium.
vii) Potassium:
Normal blood levels of potassium help keep your heart beating steadily. However, too much
potassium can build up when the kidneys no longer function well. Dangerous heart rhythms may
result, which can lead to death.
Potassium is found in many food groups, including fruits and vegetables. Choosing the right item
from each food group can help control your potassium levels.
When eating fruits:


Choose peaches, grapes, pears, cherries, apples, berries, pineapple, plums, tangerines, and
watermelon



Limit or avoid oranges and orange juice, nectarines, Kiwis, raisins or other dried fruit,
bananas, cantaloupe, honeydew, prunes, and nectarines

When eating vegetables:


Choose broccoli, cabbage, carrots, cauliflower, celery, cucumber, eggplant, green and wax
beans, lettuce, onion, peppers, watercress, zucchini, and yellow squash



Limit or avoid asparagus, avocado, potatoes, tomatoes or tomato sauce, winter squash,
pumpkin, avocado, and cooked spinach

viii) Iron:
Patients with advanced kidney failure also have anemia \ and usually need extra iron.
Many foods contain extra iron (liver, beef, pork, chicken, lima and kidney beans, iron-fortified
cereals). Because of your kidney disease, talk this over with your doctor, nurse, or dietitian.
Diet for Peptic Ulcer:
A peptic ulcer is a sore in the inner lining of the stomach or upper small intestine (duodenum).
Ulcers develop when the intestine or stomach's protective layer is broken down. When this
happens, digestive juices can damage the intestine or stomach tissue. These strong juices, which

P a g e | 90
contain hydrochloric acid and an enzyme called pepsin, also can injure the esophagus. The
esophagus is the tube that leads from your throat to your stomach.
Peptic ulcers are no longer a condition that most people have to live with their entire lives.
Treatment cures most ulcers. And symptoms go away quickly.
Peptic ulcers that form in the stomach are called gastric ulcers. Those that form in the upper small
intestine are called duodenal ulcers.
The best diet for people with peptic ulcer disease is one that is healthy and balanced.


Eating more often and eating diets with extra milk or dairy are NOT helpful and may even
cause more stomach acid.



Avoid foods that cause problems or discomfort for you. Most often, this list may include
alcohol, coffee, caffeinated soda, fatty foods, chocolate, and spicy foods.



Avoid late night snacks.

Other lifestyle tips that may help your ulcer healed and your symptoms better are:


If you smoke or chew tobacco, try to quit. Tobacco will slow the healing of your ulcer and
make it more likely that the ulcer will come back. Your doctor can help.



Reduce your stress and watch for stressful, tense times. Stress can bother your reflux problem.

Avoid drugs such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), or naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn). Take
acetaminophen (Tylenol) to relieve pain. Take any of your medicines with plenty of water.
Diet for Anemia:
Anemia is a condition that develops when your blood lacks enough healthy red blood cells or
hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is a main part of red blood cells and binds oxygen. If you have too few
or abnormal red blood cells, or your hemoglobin is abnormal or low, the cells in your body will
not get enough oxygen. Symptoms of anemia -- like fatigue -- occur because organs aren't getting
what they need to function properly.
Low levels of vitamins or iron in the body can cause some types of anemia. These low levels may
be due to poor diet or certain diseases or conditions.
To raise your vitamin or iron level, your doctor may ask you to change your diet or take vitamin
or iron supplements. Common vitamin supplements are vitamin B12 and folic acid (folate).
Vitamin C sometimes is given to help the body absorb iron.
a) Iron:
Your body needs iron to make hemoglobin. Your body can more easily absorb iron from meats
than from vegetables or other foods. To treat your anemia, your doctor may suggest eating more
meat especially red meat (such as beef or liver), as well as chicken, turkey, pork, fish, and
shellfish.
Nonmeat foods that are good sources of iron include:

P a g e | 91


Spinach and other dark green leafy vegetables



Tofu



Peas; lentils; white, red, and baked beans; soybeans; and chickpeas



Dried fruits, such as prunes, raisins, and apricots



Prune juice



Iron-fortified cereals and breads

You can look at the Nutrition Facts label on packaged foods to find out how much iron the items
contain. The amount is given as a percentage of the total amount of iron you need every day.
Iron also is available as a supplement. It's usually combined with multivitamins and other
minerals that help your body absorb iron.
Doctors may recommend iron supplements for premature infants and infants who are fed breast
milk only or formula that isn't fortified with iron.
Large amounts of iron can be harmful, so take iron supplements only as your doctor prescribes.
b) Vitamin B12:
Low levels of vitamin B12 can lead to pernicious anemia. This type of anemia often is treated
with vitamin B12 supplements.
Good food sources of vitamin B12 include:


Breakfast cereals with added vitamin B12



Meats such as beef, liver, poultry, and fish



Eggs and dairy products (such as milk, yogurt, and cheese)



Foods fortified with vitamin B12, such as soy-based beverages and vegetarian burgers

c) Folic Acid:
Folic acid (folate) is a form of vitamin B that's found in foods. Your body needs folic acid to
make and maintain new cells. Folic acid also is very important for pregnant women. It helps them
avoid anemia and promotes healthy growth of the fetus.
Good sources of folic acid include:


Bread, pasta, and rice with added folic acid



Spinach and other dark green leafy vegetables



Black-eyed peas and dried beans



Beef liver



Eggs



Bananas, oranges, orange juice, and some other fruits and juices

P a g e | 92
d) Vitamin C:
Vitamin C helps the body absorb iron. Good sources of vitamin C are vegetables and fruits,
especially citrus fruits. Citrus fruits include oranges, grapefruits, tangerines, and similar fruits.
Fresh and frozen fruits, vegetables, and juices usually have more vitamin C than canned ones.
If you're taking medicines, ask your doctor or pharmacist whether you can eat grapefruit or drink
grapefruit juice. This fruit can affect the strength of a few medicines and how well they work.
Other fruits rich in vitamin C include kiwi fruit, strawberries, and cantaloupes.
Vegetables rich in vitamin C include broccoli, peppers, Brussels sprouts, tomatoes, cabbage,
potatoes, and leafy green vegetables like turnip greens and spinach.
Diet for Gastrointestinal Diseases:
Gastrointestinal graft-versus-host disease (also known as GI GVHD) can cause nausea, vomiting,
abdominal pain and diarrhea. Protein loss can be high, resulting in the need for a protein-rich diet.
If a patient has large amounts of diarrhea, the doctor may ask the patient not to eat or drink for
several days to allow the gastrointestinal tract to rest. When eating is restarted, the patient may
best tolerate a diet that is low in fat, low in lactose (milk sugar), low in insoluble fiber and low in
acidic foods.
The Gastrointestinal Diet 1 and Gastrointestinal Diet 2:
The Gastrointestinal Diet 1 (GI 1 diet) and Gastrointestinal Diet 2 (GI 2 diet) are designed to
reduce GI discomfort (such as abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and diarrhea) after eating. The
diets are based on the following guidelines:


Low fat: Fats are hard to digest and can increase diarrhea.



Low fiber: Certain fibers (insoluble fibers, such as in whole wheat products) can increase
diarrhea or gas. However, the fibers allowed in the GI 2 diet (soluble fibers, such as apples
and pears) help to form stools.



Low lactose: Dairy products contain a sugar called lactose that may be hard to digest during
GI illness. Signs of poor digestion are bloating, gas, abdominal cramping and diarrhea.
Lactose-free milk is available as a substitute for regular milk. Talk with your dietitian about
use of oral lactase enzyme tablets with other dairy products.



Low acid and irritants: Foods that are high in acid or spicy can irritate the mouth, stomach
or GI tract.

Starting the GI 1 or GI 2 Diet:
The following are recommended as you start the GI diets:


Carbohydrate-rich and protein-rich foods are easier for your body to digest than high-fat
foods. Limit fatty foods to three servings each day to start with.



Limit meal size. Smaller, more-frequent meals are easier to digest.

P a g e | 93


Try one new food at a time. Wait at least three hours before trying another new food.



If your GI symptoms (abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting or diarrhea) increase, do not eat the
most recently introduced food again. Tell your dietitian, nurse or doctor about your symptoms.

Progressing on the GI 1 and GI 2 Diets:
The GI 1 diet does not provide all of the nutrients a person needs to remain healthy. If it is to be
followed for longer than one week, other nutrition support should be considered. The GI 1 diet
should be used to reacquaint a patient with easily digested foods and to assess a patient's tolerance
to these foods. The patient should start with the foods listed in the top table (“Foods to Try First”).
Once the patient has tolerated the GI 1 beverages, cereals, starches and fruits for a few days, the
foods in the second table (“If Tolerated, Try”) should be tried and tolerance of the items assessed.
When the GI 1 diet has been tolerated without worsening GI symptoms, the patient may progress
to the GI 2 diet.
The GI 2 diet offers a greater variety of foods. It can provide adequate nutrition and so may be
continued for a long period of time.
Each person is different. What may be best for you may not be best for someone else. The rate of
progressing from the GI 1 to the GI 2 diet and then to a general diet varies between people. The
decision to advance the diets is based on each patient’s GI symptoms. You should work with a
dietitian while progressing on the GI diets to help ensure that nutrients needs are being met. Your
dietitian can give you additional guidelines based on your specific needs.
Gastrointestinal Diet 1:
In this diet, all foods must be selected and prepared according to Immuno-suppressed Patient Diet.
Gastrointestinal Diet 2:
This diet is designed to reduce gastrointestinal "GI" discomfort (abdominal pain, nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea) after eating.
The Bland Diet for Gastrointestinal Disorders:
The bland diet, also referred to as the soft diet, is created specifically to decrease peristalsis and
to avoid irritation of the gastrointestinal tract. It can be beneficial for people with peptic ulcer
disease, chronic gastritis, reflux esophagitis and dyspepsia. It is also used occasionally in the
treatment of hiatal hernia. The bland diet can also be helpful for those experiencing occasional
nausea or vomiting. It is designed primarily to help patients recover from these conditions or other
medical circumstances in which improved digestion would be essential. Even though portion sizes
are strictly controlled, the bland diet is not particularly effective as a long-term weight loss diet.
Many people find the bland diet to be very difficult to maintain. The use of acceptable spice
alternatives can help to make the diet easier. Most patients will slowly return to a more normal
diet once their medical issues have been resolved.

P a g e | 94
The Bland Diet:
The bland diet consists of foods that are easily digestible, seasoned mildly, low in fiber and
acidity, and tender. The diet eliminates fried foods, highly seasoned foods, and most raw or gasforming fruits and vegetables. Drinks containing alcohol and Xanthine are also to be avoided. In
order to maintain a balanced diet, an appropriate number of servings allowed for each food group
should be consumed on a daily basis.
Foods to Include


All milk and milk products



All fats and oils



Mild cheeses and cottage cheese



Cooked, frozen, or canned vegetables



Lettuce in small amounts



Cooked or canned fruit without skins, seeds or tough fibers



Avocado, banana, and citrus without membrane



All lean, tender meats, poultry, fish and shellfish



Eggs



Smooth nut butters



Tofu and other meat substitutes



Mildly seasoned meat stock, broth bouillon, or cream soups made with allowed foods



Butter or fortified margarine



Mild salad dressings such as mayonnaise, French or vinegar and oil



White, refined wheat, and seedless rye breads



Plain white rolls, white melba toast, matzo, english muffin, bagel, pita bread, and tortilla



Couscous



Saltine, graham, soda or plain crackers



Cooked, refined cereals such as cream of wheat, oatmeal, farina, and cream of rice



Dry corn and rice cereals such as puffed rice or corn flakes



Potatoes



Enriched rice, barley, noodles, spaghetti, macaroni, and other pastas



Pepper, herbs, spices, ketchup, mustard and vinegar in moderation



Sugar, syrup, honey, jelly, hard candies, plain chocolate, molasses and marshmallows



Iodized salts



Cakes, cookies, pies, puddings, custard, ice cream, sherbet, and Jell-O made with allowed
foods



Herb teas



Fruit juices and mildly flavored vegetable juices

P a g e | 95
Foods to Avoid


Raw vegetables, dried peas, beans and corn



Gas forming vegetables such as broccoli, brussel sprouts, cabbage, onions, cauliflower,
cucumber, green pepper, rutabagas, turnips and sauerkraut



Berries and figs



Whole grain and coarse cereals such as bran



Seeds in or on breads and crackers



Bread or bread products with nuts or dried fruit



Potato chips, fried potatoes, and wild rice



Highly seasoned, cured or smoked meats



Poultry or fish such as corned beef, luncheon meats, frankfurter and other sausages



Sardine anchovies



Strong flavored cheeses



Chunky peanut butter



Highly seasoned salad dressings with seeds or pickle relish



All sweets and desserts containing nuts, coconut or fruit



Fried pastries, such as doughnuts



Caffeinated beverages



Alcoholic beverages



Carbonated beverages



Strongly flavored seasonings and condiments such as garlic, barbecue sauce, chili sauce, chili
pepper, horse radish, pepper and chili powder



Pickles, seed spices olives

P a g e | 96
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1) F. C. Blank: A Hand book of Foods and Nutrition, Agrobios Pub. Jodhpur.
2) N. Swarup, S. Arora and S. C. Pathak: Laboratory techniques in modern biology.
3) Manoranjan Kalia: Food analysis and quality control, Kalyani publisher New Delhi
4) N. K. Roy and D. C. Sen: Text book of Practical dairy chemistry, Kalyani publisher New
Delhi
5) Vidya, C. and D. Bhaskara Rao: A text book of Nutrition, Discovery publishing house, New
Delhi- 110 002.
6) S. R. Thimmaiah: Standard methods of biochemical analysis, Kalyani publisher, New Delhi.
7) M. Swami Nathan: Handbook of food and nutrition, The Bangalore printing and publishing
Co. Ltd., Bangalore.
8) Sumati R. Mudambi and M.V. Rajgopal: Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy,
New Age International Publication.
9) B Srilakshmi: Nutrition Science, New Age International Publication.
10) B Srilakshmi: Dietetics, New Age International Publication.
11) Sunetra Roday: Food Science and Nutrition.
12) Kumud Khanna, Sharda Gupta, Santosh Jain Passi, Rama Seth, Ranjana Mahna and Seema
Puri : Textbook of Nutrition and Dietetics.
13) Pooja Verma: Food and Nutritional Science.
14) Sumati R. Mudambi, Shalini M. Rao and M. V. Rajgopal: Food Science, New Age
International Publication.
15) Anita Tull: Food and Nutrition.

P a g e | 97

About Authors

Dr. D. V. Ahirrao
M.Sc. Ph.D.
Associate Professor, in PG Department of Zoology, S. S. V. P. S’s. L. K. Dr. P. R. Ghogrey
Science College, Dhule. He has 27 years teaching experience. He has published 25 research
papers in National and International Journals. He also published 30 Text book of Zoology. O1
Minor Research Project completed. He is recognized guide for Ph.D. of KBC NMU, Jalgaon.
Presently he is Member of BOS in Zoology and Faculty of Science and Technology, KBC NMU,
Jalgaon.

Dr. N. H. Desale
M.Sc. Ph.D.
Associate Professor, Department of Zoology, Kisan Vidya Prasarak Sanstha’s Arts, Commerce
and Science College, Parola. He has 25 years teaching experience. He has published 06 research
papers in National and International Journals. He also published 04 Text book of Zoology.
Presently he is Member of BOS in Zoology, KBC NMU, Jalgaon.

